Discussing the dilemma facing western diplomats in confronting Iran’s nuclear programme, Henry Kissinger wrote in 2006: “Diplomacy never operates in a vacuum. It persuades not by the eloquence of its practitioners but by assembling a balance of incentives and risks.”
Rarely has the balance of incentives and risks been placed so starkly in front of Iran’s leaders as now.
Donald Trump, either by design or by stumbling ad hoc towards a strategy, has left Iran with a stark choice: either return to the negotiating table and accept the offer of “a deal”, or see Israel – possibly with US support – pulp Iran’s security apparatus, nuclear programme and economy into the ground in what would be the ultimate exercise in maximum pressure, the term the US president gave to his first-term economic sanctions against Tehran. It is in Trump’s words a demand for unconditional surrender.
Judging by his statements and actions over the past 48 hours, Trump is also trying to demonstrate that any deal is seen to be on his terms, and that he is sole decision-maker. It is an attempted display of raw power not just to Iran, but to Europe.
In a move designed to underline Europe’s irrelevance and indeed his contempt for the multilateralism symbolised by the G7, Trump abandoned the Canadian summit a day early. He has left such G7s early before, but never quite so dramatically.
One senior diplomat, asked if Trump had flown to Washington essentially on a diplomatic mission to secure peace or to join the war against Iran, replied frankly: “We don’t know!”
As Air Force One departed, Emmanuel Macron tried to shape the narrative of the departure by saying that a ceasefire was in the offing, if not close. Trump then, in a tone of some relish, belittled the “the publicity-seeking” French leader in typically stark terms. “Whether purposely or not, Emmanuel always gets it wrong,” he posted on Truth Social. He was after something “much bigger” than a ceasefire, he said.
Indeed US diplomats at the G7 had refused to countenance the call for a ceasefire appearing in the joint communique on the Iran-Israel crisis, the chief raison d’être for issuing a joint statement in the first place.
In the interests of securing any kind of communique, the European leaders retreated, leaving a sparse eight sentences that in effect implicitly endorsed Israel’s actions by saying we “affirm that Israel has a right to defend itself. We reiterate our support for the security of Israel.”
The day after Trump’s exit, the four European leaders left abandoned high in the Rocky Mountains reflected on Trump’s plan, and in so doing revealed differences.
Friedrich Merz, the German chancellor, expressed his utmost respect for the Israelis’ courage, saying they were doing the rest of the world’s dirty work. He added: “It would be good if this terrorist regime was brought to an end.” If Iran did not accept the complete destruction of its nuclear programme, it would be ended with the help of the US, he said.
Keir Starmer and Macron were both much more cautious, speaking of de-escalation, and worrying how this war would end. In the Commons the UK foreign secretary, David Lammy, said Iran’s nuclear programme had to be constrained, but added: “Fundamentally, no military action can put an end to Iran’s nuclear capabilities.” It was for Iran to choose its leaders, he said.
The UK and France privately said it recognised Iran’s right to enrich limited stocks of uranium within Iran, the principle underlying the 2015 nuclear deal, and the sticking point in the US-Iran talks.
Regardless it looks once again as though Europe has been left as the bystander to history, adept at drafting consensual communiques and declarations while the real events are shaped by unilateralists prepared to use destructive force. Rarely has the sword been so much mightier than the pen. Russia happily crowed it had always seen the G7, a club from which it was excluded for invading Crimea, as “pretty useless”.
In fairness to Europe’s leaders, they have tried to play a part in securing a deal. Three European foreign ministers spoke to their Iranian counterpart, Abbas Araghchi, by phone at the request of the US.
The kernel of the proposal that they relayed was that Iran should have to offer in effect an unconditional ceasefire, and end all talk of escalation. Threats by Tehran to remove all UN weapons inspectors needed to be rescinded.
The idea of a motion to the Iranian parliament calling for Iran to leave the nuclear non-proliferation treaty, a precursor to acquiring a nuclear bomb, should be dropped. US assets in the region must not be attacked. De-escalation had to be the priority, since any escalation would lead to a catastrophic conflict, the consequences of which no one could control.
Araghchi, sources said, reverted to his argument that Iran could hardly silence its guns without Israel doing the same.
One western diplomat admitted they had been reduced to sending messages to the Iranians about a US-Israeli strategy about which they had not been consulted let alone approved.
With many reasons to feel aggrieved – and also to be reviled – the Iranian regime appears to have been left with the choice between its destruction and its humiliation, including a complete end to its nuclear programme, once seen as a symbol of its sovereignty.
Greatly diminished, Iran will have to decide if, in the interest of self-preservation, it has to abandon any right to draw red lines. A chastened Europe after this past few days may recognise some of Iran’s dilemma.
Air India has cancelled at least eight international flights operated by Boeing 787-8 Dreamliners, the aircraft model involved in the crash last week that killed at least 270 people.
The cancellations on Tuesday affected services to cities including London, Paris, Vienna and Dubai. The airline cited a combination of aircraft unavailability, technical snags, airspace restrictions, and extended safety checks.
At least three other Dreamliner flights have been grounded or delayed in the past 48 hours, as India’s aviation regulator ordered rigorous pre-flight inspections across Air India’s fleet of 33 Dreamliners. A Boeing 777 operating the San Francisco-Mumbai route was also grounded because of a technical hitch.
The disruption came as pressure mounted on Air India and Boeing as the investigation into India’s deadliest plane crash in decades continued. Investigators are pursuing multiple theories, including what some independent experts believe may have been a catastrophic – and extremely rare – dual engine failure.
Offering a measure of relief for Air India late on Tuesday, India’s aviation regulator said it had found no major safety flaws in the airline’s Dreamliner fleet but warned of persistent maintenance shortcomings and coordination lapses that could undermine reliability.
The Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA), which conducted in-depth inspections of 24 Dreamliners, raised concerns over delays linked to spare-part shortages and weak internal coordination between engineering, ground handling, and operations teams.
Still, in a boost to the Tata owned airline, which is facing intense scrutiny after the crash, the DGCA said all inspected Dreamliners were compliant with existing aviation safety standards. The wide-body jets form the backbone of Air India’s long-haul network.
Flight AI171 issued a Mayday call moments after taking off from Ahmedabad’s Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel international airport on 12 June. It reached only 650 feet before crashing into a medical college complex, erupting into a fireball. Only one of the 242 people onboard survived, with at least 29 people on the ground also killed.
By Tuesday, officials had matched the DNA of 135 victims and returned 101 bodies to relatives, though they said five of those individuals had not been listed on the flight manifest.
The identification process has been slow and gruelling. Many victims were burned beyond recognition, and officials said the remains were being processed in small batches through genetic testing. The official death toll cannot be finalised until the meticulous process of DNA identification is complete.
Dr Rakesh Joshi, medical superintendent at Ahmedabad civil hospital, said “135 DNA samples have been matched, and 101 bodies have already been handed over to the respective families. Of these 101 deceased, five were not on board the flight.” He said he hoped DNA profiling would be completed by Wednesday.
The sole survivor, a 40-year-old British national of Indian origin, Vishwash Kumar Ramesh, described the horror of the crash: “Right in front of my eyes, I saw air hostesses, uncles, aunties dying,” said Ramesh, who lost his brother Ashok in the tragedy.
On Tuesday, hundreds of people gathered in Mumbai to pay an emotional farewell at the funeral of the flight’s captain, Sumeet Sabharwal, whose final actions may have prevented even greater loss of life. A veteran pilot with more than 8,000 hours of experience, he has been praised for appearing to have steered the aircraft clear of a densely populated area.
India’s Aircraft Accident Investigation Bureau is leading the inquiry, supported by UK and US safety agencies. Investigators are examining multiple potential causes, from thrust-and-flap settings to fact that the landing gear did not appear to have retracted. Investigators, who have recovered the cockpit voice and flight data recorders, are also looking at whether the aircraft lost thrust in both engines. “There was some sort of dual engine failure,” said Steve Scheibner, a former US navy pilot, commentator, and a retired American Airlines captain.
The DGCA has asked Air India to submit records from recent inspections and detailed personnel files of the pilots and flight dispatcher, Reuters reported. It has also ordered safety drills in all airports and instructed flying schools to conduct compliance checks.
The crash marks a pivotal moment for Air India. The tea-to-steel Tata Group, which acquired the carrier in 2022 after nearly 70 years of state ownership, has invested billions of dollars to modernise its ageing fleet and revive the brand’s image.
Natarajan Chandrasekaran, chair of Tata Sons, said: “We need to use this incident as an act of force to build a safer airline. We’re going to get through this.”
Boeing’s commercial chief, Stephanie Pope, met Chandrasekaran at Air India’s headquarters near Delhi on Tuesday. The tragedy involving Boeing’s most advanced aircraft in service has renewed scrutiny of the manufacturer’s controversial safety record. Boeing has said only that it was “focused on supporting the investigation”.
North Korea will send “a division of builders, two military brigades – 5,000 people” as well as 1,000 demining personnel to the Kursk region, according to Russian news agencies quoting Vladimir Putin’s security council chief, Sergei Shoigu, who was visiting Pyongyang, the North Korean capital. Out of 10,000 North Korean soldiers already sent to fight against Ukraine there have been 6,000 casualties, the British defence ministry said this week. Tuesday’s Russian reports suggested the new personnel would be put to work in Kursk, which was partly invaded by Ukraine.
Emmanuel Macron on Tuesday accused Putin, the Russian president, of exploiting the preoccupied international climate to carry out a deadly attack on Kyiv. “It shows the complete cynicism of President Putin, who is using the international context to step again attacks against civilians,” the French president told reporters at the G7 summit in Canada, which Trump rushed out of on Monday night. A US citizen died in the attack on Kyiv, the state department said.
Trump’s absence left Ukraine and its president, Volodymyr Zelenskyy, in the lurch, Patrick Wintour writes, and has set European leaders and officials seething. One said: “It is an permanent hazard that Ukraine is a victim of events and Trump’s short attention span. There had been all sorts of promises for this summit – including new US arms deliveries being offered.” Ukraine was proposing to buy US weapons including new air defences, to get around Trump’s complaint that Ukraine is a drain on the US budget and instead appeal to his focus on making money.
The “G6” leaders who remained to complete the summit in Canada discussed Russia’s war in Ukraine and international cooperation on key non-military issues. Zelenskyy said: “We are ready for the peace negotiations, unconditional ceasefire. I think it’s very important. But for this, we need pressure [on Russia].” Trump’s stance on Ukraine puts him fundamentally at odds with the other G7 leaders, who are clear that Russia is the aggressor in the war. The US has declined to join new sanctions against Russia from other countries, with Trump saying: “When I sanction a country, that costs the US a lot of money, a tremendous amount of money.”
Russia’s attack on Kyiv flattened a section of an apartment block, as a barrage of hundreds of drones and dozens of missiles killed at least 18 people and wounded 151 across Ukraine and officials declared a day of mourning on Wednesday. Authorities said 16 were killed in Kyiv and two in Odesa. A missile struck a nine-storey residential building in Kyiv’s Solomianskyi district. “I have never seen anything like this before. It is simply horrific. When they started pulling people out, and everyone was cut up, elderly people and children … I do not know how long they can continue to torment us ordinary people,” said Viktoriia Vovchenko, 57, a neighbour.
Australia has joined allies in imposing penalties on the Russian “shadow fleet” used to evade sanctions and trade in goods that help support Moscow’s war in Ukraine. They are the first such measures by Australia. “Operating under deceptive practices, including flag-hopping, disabling tracking systems, and operating with inadequate insurance, the shadow fleet enables the illicit trade of Russian oil and other sanctioned goods,” said Penny Wong, the foreign minister in Canberra.
Witnesses have described scenes like “a horror movie” in Gaza after Israeli forces fired towards a crowd waiting for trucks loaded with flour near Khan Younis, on one of the bloodiest days for weeks in the devastated territory.
At least 59 Palestinians were killed according to medics and hundreds more wounded in the southern city. People at the scene and doctors described seeing injured and dead with wounds typical of those caused by artillery or tank fire. Unverified video shared on social media showed about a dozen mangled bodies lying in a street.
Multiple other incidents of violence involving crowds of desperate Palestinians trying to get food were reported on Tuesday. Medics said at least 14 other people were also killed by Israeli gunfire and airstrikes elsewhere in the densely populated enclave, taking Tuesday’s overall death toll to at least 73.
Eight Palestinians were reported to have died in a separate shooting near an aid distribution site in the city of Rafah, and several more injured or killed in a third incident between Rafah and Khan Younis.
The Israeli military acknowledged firing in the area of the crowd in Khan Younis and said it was looking into the incident.
Musab Barbakh, 22, said he had arrived at the al-Tahlia junction at midnight. “I was sitting with a group of young men at around 8.30am when suddenly a shell landed right in the middle of us. I don’t know how I survived without any injuries. As I was running away, another shell hit another group of people. Then a missile was fired, followed by random gunfire,” he said.
“The ground was filled with martyrs, the wounded, and pools of blood. Cars were exploding, the bodies of the martyrs were torn apart – wherever you looked, you saw scenes of body parts, blood, and corpses. I felt like I was living in a horror movie.”
Abdullah Anshasi, 30, from the al-Amal neighbourhood in Khan Younis, said he, too, was waiting for the aid to arrive when “explosions began and shrapnel rained down around us”.
“Many people were killed. We saw several artillery shells land around us,” he said. “What we witnessed was horrifying: human bodies flying through the air, hundreds of injured people lying on the ground. We survived by a miracle.”
Palestinian medics said at least 59 people were killed and 221 wounded in the incident, at least 20 of them in critical condition.
“The injured were transported to us … on donkey carts, with multiple injured people stacked on top of each other. In some, as many as 20 wounded all piled up,” Dr Mohammed Saqer, the head of the nursing department at the Nasser medical complex in Khan Younis, said.
“Most of the injuries are in the upper body – limbs, chest, heart, and head. Many victims arrived as dismembered body parts, with amputations and other severe injuries. Based on our inquiries with eyewitnesses and those accompanying the injured, the attack appears to have been carried out using artillery shells, followed by live gunfire from soldiers.”
A second doctor at the Nasser medical complex said the hospital morgue was completely full, so bodies were being placed outside the building. “Thousands of people – relatives and injured – have flooded the hospital, searching for their loved ones. Wounded people are lying in the hospital courtyards. The emergency department has been completely paralysed,” they said.
The IDF said it was aware of reports of casualties “from IDF fire”.
“The details of the incident are under review. The IDF regrets any harm to uninvolved individuals and operates to minimise harm as much as possible to them while maintaining the safety of our troops,” its statement said.
The IDF said a crowd had been identified adjacent to an aid distribution truck that had got stuck in the area of Khan Younis, and in proximity to IDF troops operating in the area.
The exact identity of the trucks expected at the al-Tahlia junction was not immediately clear. UN agencies, commercial operators and others have all moved limited amounts of aid into Gaza in recent weeks.
Anas Barbakh, 21, said he had travelled to al-Tahlia after hearing that trucks loaded with flour had reached the crossroads for the past two days.
“So many people were killed and wounded that we couldn’t even tell who was dead, who was injured, or who was still alive. My brother and my cousin Musab were injured – one in the head and the other in the chest. We transported them to the hospital on horse-drawn carts,” he told the Guardian.
A tight blockade on all supplies entering Gaza was imposed by Israel throughout March and April, threatening many of the 2.3 million people who live there with a “critical risk of famine”. Food has become extremely scarce, sending prices for basics soaring.
“Despite the danger, we are forced to go [to get aid]. No one can afford to buy a bag of flour for $400 … I have a family of 10 people to feed,” said Barbakh.
Since the blockade was partially lifted last month, the UN has tried to bring in aid but has faced major obstacles, including rubble-choked roads, Israeli military restrictions, continuing air strikes and growing anarchy.
Aid officials said between 20 and 30 UN trucks had entered Gaza through the main checkpoint of Kerem Shalom in recent days but all had been looted. “There is no law and order. Some of it is criminal and organised but mostly it is just desperate people trying to get some food,” a senior UN official told the Guardian.
Palestinians say Israeli forces have opened fire repeatedly on crowds trying to reach food distribution points run by the Gaza Humanitarian Foundation (GHF), a private organisation that recently began operating in Gaza with Israeli and US support.
The second incident reported on Monday involved Palestinians seeking to access an aid hub in Rafah. The details of the third incident were unclear, though witnesses described many injured. There was no immediate comment from the IDF or GHF.
On Monday, at least 37 Palestinians were killed as they tried to reach a GHF site, local authorities said. The IDF disputed the death toll, saying it did not match their information. Witnesses blamed that shooting on Israeli troops who opened fire early in the morning as crowds of hungry Palestinians converged on two hubs managed by the GHF.
Coverage of the war in Gaza is constrained by Israeli attacks on Palestinian journalists and a bar on international reporters entering the Gaza Strip to report independently on the war.
Israel has not allowed foreign reporters to enter Gaza since 7 October 2023, unless they are under Israeli military escort. Reporters who join these trips have no control over where they go, and other restrictions include a bar on speaking to Palestinians in Gaza.
Palestinian journalists and media workers inside Gaza have paid a heavy price for their work reporting on the war, with over 180 killed since the conflict began.
The committee to protect journalists has determined that at least 19 of them “were directly targeted by Israeli forces in killings which CPJ classifies as murders”.
Foreign reporters based in Israel filed a legal petition seeking access to Gaza, but it was rejected by the supreme court on security grounds. Private lobbying by diplomats and public appeals by prominent journalists and media outlets have been ignored by the Israeli government.
To ensure accurate reporting from Gaza given these restrictions, the Guardian works with trusted journalists on the ground; our visual​​ teams verif​y photo and videos from third parties; and we use clearly sourced data from organisations that have a track record of providing accurate information in Gaza during past conflicts, or during other conflicts or humanitarian crises.
Emma Graham-Harrison, chief Middle East correspondent
Israel hopes the GHF will replace the previous comprehensive system of aid distribution run by the UN, which Israeli officials claim allowed Hamas to steal and sell aid. UN agencies and major aid groups, which have delivered humanitarian aid across Gaza since the start of war, have rejected the new system, saying it is impractical, inadequate and unethical. They deny there is widespread theft of aid by Hamas.
The GHF’s provisions so far have been grossly inadequate, humanitarian officials in the devastated territory said.
Israel’s military campaign since October 2023 has killed more than 55,500 Palestinians, more than half of them women and children, according to Gaza’s health ministry. Its count does not distinguish between civilians and combatants.
Israel launched its campaign aiming to destroy Hamas after the group’s 7 October 2023 attack on southern Israel, in which militants killed about 1,200 people, mostly civilians, and took another 251 hostage. The militants still hold 53 hostages, fewer than half of them alive, after most of the rest were released in ceasefire agreements or other deals.
Associated Press contributed to reporting
Donald Trump is threatening to keep 25% tariffs on some or all of its steel imports from the UK unless it gives specific guarantees over the Indian-owned steelmaking plant at Port Talbot in south Wales, sources have told the Guardian.
An agreement to reduce tariffs on UK car exports to the US and scrap them for the aerospace sector was signed off by the US president and Keir Starmer on Monday, on the sidelines of the G7 summit in Canada.
However, it did not include the removal of tariffs on steel imports from the UK. Officials are still negotiating over the fine points of a deal to cover the steel and aluminium industry, amid US concerns about the fact that Tata Steel imports raw materials from abroad.
Starmer told reporters in Banff, Canada: “There’s further work to do in relation to steel, but we’re getting on and doing that work.”
Trump and Starmer announced the main terms of the trade agreement in May, with the UK prime minister calling it a “fantastic, historic day”. According to that deal, tariffs on up to 100,000 British cars are due to be reduced to 10% from 27.5%.
As it stands, UK steelmakers still face 25% tariffs, although this is lower than the global tariff of 50% imposed by the Trump administration on other nations. The UK business department said the two leaders had pledged to “make progress towards 0% tariffs on core steel products as agreed” in May.
The deal was heralded by Downing Street as a triumph for Starmer’s brand of gentle diplomacy, in which he wooed the president with the promise of a state visit while shying away from any direct criticism on topics such as trade.
The May trade announcement itself was followed by weeks of further talks as the two sides continued to negotiate over the small print. Monday’s announcement by the two leaders means the tariff reductions will kick in for aerospace and automobiles over the coming weeks, with Starmer saying they would begin “very soon”.
However, the Trump administration is understood to be seeking further guarantees on British steel exports, given Tata Steel has closed its blast furnaces at Port Talbot last year and therefore now imports raw materials from abroad until the planned opening of a new, much cleaner electric arc furnace in 2027.
According to US import rules, steel must be “melted and poured” in a country to qualify as having originated in that country.
The company says these supplies come from Tata’s other sites, mainly those in the Netherlands and India.
US trade officials are considering granting Tata an exemption, sources say, but are asking for guarantees about when it will switch on its new electric arc furnaces, and therefore stop importing raw materials from abroad. They also want to know where those supplies are coming from and how Tata is able to track their movements throughout the supply chain.
The British government is hoping that the fact that Tata does not import any of the raw steel from China will persuade the Trump administration to include all British exports in the deal.
Sign up to Business Today
Get set for the working day – we'll point you to all the business news and analysis you need every morning
after newsletter promotion
Starmer is sending his business adviser Varun Chandra to lead a delegation to Washington next week, and officials say they are confident of striking a final deal next month.
The Chinese ownership of British Steel, which has a separate plant at Scunthorpe, is understood not to be an issue since the government took over its management.
Alasdair McDiarmid, the assistant general secretary of the steel industry union Community, said on Tuesday: “It is now absolutely vital that a deal for steel is secured as soon as possible. Our steel producers and their US customers need an end to the current state of uncertainty to allow normal business to resume.
“Crucially, we must see a full exemption for all UK steel exports to the US – without that guarantee, some of our leading steel businesses could be left behind, with a threat to jobs and livelihoods.”
A government source said: “Thanks to our agreement with the US, the UK is the only country in the world to be exempt from the 50% tariff on steel and aluminium that other countries now face.
“Yesterday the US president confirmed his intention to work with the UK to remove the 25% tariffs on steel and aluminium, helping us to ensure they can be implemented as soon as possible and in the best interests of the UK industry.”
Additional reporting by Peter Walker in Banff
A federal court in Argentina has granted former president Cristina Fernández de Kirchner’s request to serve a six-year prison sentence for corruption at her home in Buenos Aires.
Judges ruled that Fernández, 72, can serve time in the apartment, where she lives with her daughter and her granddaughter, citing her age and security reasons. Fernández was the victim of an attempted assassination three years ago.
In the ruling, the court said that Fernández “must remain at the registered address, an obligation that she may not break except in exceptional situations”.
Last week, Argentina’s highest court upheld Fernández’s sentence in a ruling that permanently banned her from public office over the corruption conviction that found she had directed state contracts to a friend while she was the first lady and president.
The explosive ruling left Fernández, Argentina’s charismatic yet deeply divisive ex-leader, subject to arrest and sent her supporters pouring into the streets of Buenos Aires, Argentina’s capital, and blocking major highways in protest.
The ruling barred Fernández from running in this fall’s Buenos Aires legislative elections just days after she launched her campaign.
Fernández, who dominated Argentinian politics for two decades and forged the country’s main leftwing populist movement known as Kirchnerism, after her and her husband, former president Néstor Kirchner, rejects the charges as politically motivated.
During Fernández’s eight years in office (2007–2015), Argentina expanded cash payments to the poor and pioneered major social assistance programs. Her governments funded unbridled state spending by printing money, bringing Argentina notoriety for massive budget deficits and sky-high inflation.
Critics blamed Argentina’s years of economic volatility on Fernández’s policies, and outrage over successive economic crises and the country’s bloated bureaucracy helped vault radical libertarian president Javier Milei to the presidency in late 2023.
Fernández was embroiled in multiple corruption scandals during her tenure. She was convicted in 2022 of corruption in a case that centered on 51 public contracts for public works awarded to companies linked to Lázaro Báez, a convicted construction magnate and friend of the presidential couple, at prices 20% above the standard rate in a scheme that cost the state tens of millions of dollars.
Fernández has questioned the impartiality of the judges. She claims her defense did not have access to much of the evidence and that it was gathered without regard to legal deadlines.
She faces a series of other upcoming trials on corruption charges.
Israel’s war on Iran appeared to be approaching a pivotal moment on Tuesday night after five days of bombing and retaliatory Iranian missile strikes, as Donald Trump demanded “unconditional surrender” from Tehran and weighed his military options.
Trump convened a meeting of his national security team in the White House situation room after a day of febrile rhetoric in which the president gave sharply conflicting signals over whether US forces would participate directly in Israel’s bombing campaign over Iran.
He told journalists in the morning that he expected the Iranian nuclear programme to be “wiped out” long before US intervention would be necessary. Later he took to his own social media platform, Truth Social, to suggest that the US had Iran’s supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, in its bomb-sights, and could make an imminent decision to take offensive action.
“We know exactly where the so-called ‘Supreme Leader’ is hiding. He is an easy target, but is safe there – We are not going to take him out (kill!), at least not for now,” Trump said. “But we don’t want missiles shot at civilians, or American soldiers. Our patience is wearing thin.”
In a post a few minutes later, Trump bluntly demanded “UNCONDITIONAL SURRENDER”.
It was not just Trump’s all-caps threats that triggered speculation that the US might join offensive operations. They were accompanied by the sudden forward deployment of US military aircraft to Europe and the Middle East, amid a general consensus that Iran’s deeply buried uranium enrichment facilities could prove impregnable without huge bunker-busting bombs that only the US air force possesses.
“If Iran does not back down, complete destruction of Iranian nuclear programme is on the agenda, which Israel cannot achieve alone,” German chancellor Friedrich Merz told ZDF television a day after meeting Trump at the G7 summit in Canada.
But France’s president, Emmanuel Macron, urged restraint, saying: “We recognize Israel’s right to self-defense, but we do not support actions that threaten stability in the region. The biggest mistake that can be made today is to try to change the regime in Iran by military means – because that would lead to chaos.”
Despite the US military deployments and Trump’s menacing comments, the UK prime minister, Keir Starmer, who was also at the G7 meeting, insisted the US was not about to join the Israeli bombing campaign.
“There’s nothing the president said that suggests that he’s about to get involved in this conflict,” Starmer said. “On the contrary, the G7 statement was about de-escalation ... I was sitting right next to President Trump [at the dinner], so I’ve no doubt, in my mind, the level of agreement.”
Trump left the Canadian summit a day early and flew back to Washington around midnight on Monday. On the way, he told journalists he was not seeking a ceasefire in Israel’s war on Iran but instead wanted to see a “complete give-up” by Iran, as well as “a real end” to Iran’s nuclear programme, with Tehran abandoning its uranium enrichment “entirely”.
The vice president, JD Vance, also took to social media to discuss Trump’s options.
“He may decide he needs to take further action to end Iranian enrichment. That decision ultimately belongs to the president,” Vance wrote, before adding that “people are right to be worried about foreign entanglement after the last 25 years of idiotic foreign policy”.
The US president predicted Israel would not let up in its bombing campaign and suggested a decisive moment in that campaign was imminent, though he made clear he expected Israel to destroy Iran’s nuclear facilities without US help.
“You’re going to find out over the next two days … Nobody’s slowed up so far,” he told CBS News on the flight back to Washington, saying he was returning to the White House to focus on the conflict.
Israel’s justification for its shock attack on Iran was called into question on Tuesday when CNN cited US intelligence assessments as saying that when Iran was attacked, it had been “up to three years away from being able to produce and deliver [a nuclear bomb] to a target of its choosing”.
The report echoed a public assessment in March by Trump’s own director of national intelligence, Tulsi Gabbard, who told Congress “Iran is not building a nuclear weapon” and the supreme leader “has not authorised the nuclear weapons program that he suspended in 2003”.
On Tuesday, Trump shrugged off that assessment, siding instead with Israel’s claims that Tehran was on the brink of making a warhead.
“I don’t care what she said,” Trump said. “I think they were very close to having it.”
In freewheeling remarks to reporters on Air Force One, Trump also stressed that any Iranian attack on Americans or US bases, which Iran has threatened, would be met with overwhelming force, saying: “We’ll come down so hard, it’d be gloves off.”
Iran’s foreign minister, Abbas Araghchi, said Iran was open to resuming talks with the US. “If President Trump is genuine about diplomacy and interested in stopping this war, next steps are consequential,” he said.
Benjamin Netanyahu was also dismissive of the idea of diplomacy. “Of course they want to stop. They want to stop, and to keep producing the tools of death. We gave that a chance,” the Israeli prime minister said, laying out a new, expanded set of war aims.
“We want three central results: eliminating the nuclear programme, eliminating the ability to produce ballistic missiles and eliminating the axis of terror.”
He left vague what the third war aim would entail. Later on Tuesday, his foreign minister, Gideon Sa’ar, described it differently as a mission to “severely damage [the Iranians’] plan to eliminate the state of Israel”.
Asked how that would be achieved, Sa’ar told the Guardian: “We are doing that gradually. First we cut the [tentacles] of the octopus, when we dealt with Hamas and Hezbollah. Now we are dealing with the head of the octopus.”
“Regime change is not an objective of this war,” the minister insisted however, during a visit to a missile strike site in Rishon LeZion, east of Tel Aviv. He added that regime change “may be a result, but its not an objective” of the war.
Israel’s choice of targets has broadened over the course of the campaign, in line with its rhetoric. In recent days it has bombed the Iranian capital, ordering the residents of a part of northern Tehran, a third of a million people, to leave their homes. On Tuesday night, loud blasts were reported across the city.
The Israeli evacuation order was modelled on those routinely issued to Palestinians in Gaza, where bombing by the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) has flattened entire residential neighbourhoods over the course of a 20-month conflict.
The Israeli ultimatum on Monday said the bombing of Tehran would be aimed at “military infrastructure”, but one of the targets hit was a state television station, killing three staff and ending live broadcasts. Israel has also been bombing Iran’s oil and gas installations, and Iran has retaliated with strikes on Haifa, damaging a power station and a refinery in the Mediterranean port.
Israeli airstrikes killed at least 24 Iranians across the country on Tuesday morning, bringing the toll since Friday’s surprise attack to at least 224 people dead and more than 1,400 injured, Iran’s health ministry said. The scale of destruction and the threats from the IDF and Trump triggered an exodus of Tehranis, jamming the roads out of the capital overnight.
In Israel, the death toll after four days was 24, with about 600 injured. Iran fired a total of 20 to 30 missiles on Tuesday morning, according to the IDF, lightly wounding five people, marking a significant drop in the tempo of its attack compared with the previous few days.
The IDF said Iran had used 370 missiles in eight salvoes out of a US-estimated arsenal of 3,000 ballistic missiles. The IDF further claims to have destroyed 200 of Iran’s missile launchers, half the total.
Israel has also struck a severe blow to Iran’s chain of command, killing at least 11 top generals and, in some cases, their replacements. On Tuesday the IDF said it had killed the acting armed forces commander, Maj Gen Ali Shadmani, who had been in the post for only four days, after his predecessor was targeted in the first wave of strikes on Friday morning.
“Iran is completely naked and we have full freedom of action. This is an unprecedented achievement,” an IDF general staff officer told the newspaper Yedioth Ahronoth.
Iran continued to threaten Israeli cities however, with its senior army commander echoing Israeli methods by calling for the residents of Haifa and Tel Aviv to evacuate immediately.
If those threats prove empty and IDF claims of its dominance are borne out, it will leave Iran with few cards to play. The Iranian parliament has prepared a bill that would withdraw Iran from the 1968 nuclear non-proliferation treaty, so that it would no longer be legally bound to forgo nuclear weapons, but the government insists it remains opposed to all weapons of mass destruction.
State TV has also aired calls from hardline politicians suggesting that Iran block the strategically important strait of Hormuz, potentially stopping the passage of more than 17m barrels of oil a day and producing a dramatic spike in world oil prices and global inflation.
On Tuesday, the International Atomic Energy Agency confirmed that Israeli bombing sorties on the enrichment plant in Natanz had penetrated to its underground levels. But, as the war enters its sixth day, the focus of key decisions in Israel and the US is likely to be the underground facility at Fordow, near the religious centre of Qom, which houses Iran’s stockpile of highly enriched uranium as well as an enrichment plant. However, Kelsey Davenport, the director for nonproliferation policy at the Arms Control Association, said its presence was not likely to be relevant to military calculations
“Blowing up the stockpiles at Fordow would release a limited amount of radiation and chemical toxicity from the UF6, but it would be confined to the site,” Davenport said. “There may be a very slight risk that if Iran has enough 60 percent enriched uranium stored at the site, an explosion could trigger a chain reaction. But I would be very surprised if that is the reason Fordow is not being bombed. Israel knows it cannot destroy the site.”
Keir Starmer said he rushed to pick up papers dropped by Donald Trump at the G7 summit in Canada mainly to avoid anyone else stepping forward to do so and being tackled by the US president’s security team.
Speaking to reporters in Kananaskis a day after Trump fumbled some of the documents about a UK-US trade deal, letting a sheaf of papers tumble to the ground, Starmer said he had little choice but to bend down and help out.
The UK prime minister said: “I mean, look, there weren’t many choices with the documents and picking it up, because … as you probably know there were quite strict rules about who can get close to the president.
“I mean, seriously, I think if any of you [the media] had stepped forward other than me – I was just deeply conscious that in a situation like it would not have been good for anybody else to have stepped forward, not that any of you rushed to. There’s a very tightly guarded security zone around the president, as you would expect.”
As well as dropping the papers, Trump wrongly announced that he had agreed a deal with the EU, not the UK, and some of his answers were unclear and rambling.
Sign up to First Edition
Our morning email breaks down the key stories of the day, telling you what’s happening and why it matters
after newsletter promotion
Asked if he had any concerns about Trump’s health, Starmer said: “No, he was in good form yesterday, and I mean we had – I don’t know how many sessions yesterday together as the G7 and then into the evening session as well.”
As Starmer and Trump spoke to the media on Monday before their private talks, the US president was again effusive in his praise for the prime minister.
Asked why Trump liked him so much, Starmer replied: “I mean, that’s really for him to answer, but I think it’s that we do have a good relationship. I think that is in the national interest.
“Frankly, there has long been a close relationship between the US and the UK, as I’ve said many times, on defence and security and intelligence sharing in particular. I’m very pleased that I’ve got a good relationship with him, notwithstanding, as both he and I acknowledge, that our political backgrounds are different.”
As Farhad* and his friends left Tehran, they had plenty of time to survey the destruction. Smoke billowed from rooftops and flames flickered behind them as they inched their way through miles-long traffic to escape Israel’s bombardment of Iran’s capital city.
Despite leaving early on Tuesday morning, it took Farhad six hours to reach his ancestral village, a journey that usually would take no more than two-and-a-half hours.
“Young children, elderly and sick grandparents, you found everyone stuck on the roads,” Farhad, a 22-year-old student at a university in Tehran, told the Guardian via text.
Another Tehran resident, described a 10-hour journey fraught with worry as Israeli jets flew overhead.
“All the way while I was stuck in traffic we were fearing what if the strikes hit us on the highway? What if there are secret storage facilities around us? The fear of not knowing created a lot of anxiety,” said Mina*, 24, a finance professional in Tehran.
They were some of the thousands of Tehran residents who have fled since Israel launched hundreds of airstrikes on Iran early on Friday morning, which it said was aimed at preventing Iran from obtaining a nuclear weapon.
Iran responded by launching a barrage of ballistic missiles and drones at Israel in a steadily escalating tit-for-tat war, which has entered its fifth day.
Unlike Israel, which was well prepared for Iranian ballistic missiles, Tehran has no dedicated bomb shelters. City authorities opened the metro as an ad hoc shelter on Sunday and instructed other people to head to mosques – though it was unclear what protection, if any, the above-ground shelters could offer.
Farhad, like many other residents, was loth to leave his home. The young international relations major had just scored a part-time job that he hoped would boost his applications to universities in Europe.
But when a huge blast went off as he was shopping in the Sattar Khan traditional market, and his father’s friend was injured in the Israeli strike on Iran’s state broadcaster on Monday, he knew he had no choice but to leave.
“I am shattered for my friend. I am feeling useless and helpless. I don’t know how much more we can take from the news, it’s all escalating so quickly,” Farhad said.
A resident of Tehran who stayed behind estimated that “more than half” of the city’s population had left, an estimate the Guardian could not verify. “Tehran is in a state of semi-shutdown. You can say only banks and municipalities are open. Food supplies are running low, the market is almost shut down and Tehran is almost evacuated,” said Akram*, who was still in the city.
He added that petrol stations were limiting customers to 10 litres a day, creating long fuel queues.
On Monday, Israel issued evacuation orders to residents of a large part of Tehran, warning them that “military infrastructure” would soon be bombed there. The message, issued via the social media platform X, resembled similar alerts issued by the Israeli military in Gaza, Lebanon and Yemen.
X is officially banned in Iran and the Iranian government has been throttling internet access since Israeli attacks began on Friday, preventing many Iranians from seeing the evacuation orders.
Donald Trump later urged everyone to immediately evacuate Tehran in a post on Truth Social, his social media platform.
Human rights experts criticised the evacuation orders, which they said were overly vague and seemed designed to promote displacement.
“The most ‘specific’ evacuation order we have seen in Iran is 300,000 people. That’s a massive, massive order. You cannot just order 300,000 people to leave without giving specific routes to leave,” said Hussein Baoumi, the deputy regional director for the Middle East and north Africa at Amnesty International.
“The evacuation orders seem to be following the same pattern as in Lebanon and Gaza, where they really seem aimed at causing confusion and panic, rather than offering protection to civilians,” Baoumi added.
Not all residents of Tehran could flee. The war with Israel comes during Iran’s worst economic crisis in decades and some lacked the means to travel out of the city.
“There are three kinds of people that are still in Tehran: those who have no place to go; those who have no money to leave; and medium-level government staff whose leave request was rejected by the government,” said Sadia*, a woman in her 40s who was still in the city.
Activists also raised the alarm about Evin prison, which sits on the edge of the area specified by Israel’s evacuation order. It is filled with political prisoners and female protesters detained in the 2022 Woman, Life, Freedom protests, as well as ordinary offenders and has not been evacuated.
“My dad is in prison! Can you tell me how he is supposed to evacuate Tehran!? Can you tell me? What do you mean he should evacuate Tehran!?” Mehraveh Khandan, whose father, the Iranian human rights activist Reza Khandan, is detained in Evin prison, said in an Instagram post.
Despite a diplomatic flurry to stop fighting between Iran and Israel, there was no sign of a ceasefire on Tuesday night. Israeli airstrikes killed at least 225 people and wounded at least 1,400, while Iranian missiles killed at least 24 in Israel and wounded about 600.
The continued fighting left displaced residents of Tehran in limbo, as they worried about those left behind and that their own exile would be prolonged.
“From here, I see the images of my beautiful home city being destroyed. I haven’t brought much with me, just enough to survive. My entire heart and soul is in Tehran. I only brought hope with me,” Mina said.
The US has stepped up its military presence in the Middle East since the weekend but has left certain details vague to preserve operational ambiguity for Donald Trump as he considers whether the US will intervene in the Israel-Iran war.
Critically, there has been no new information about the deployment of B-2 bombers that would be used to attack Iran’s deep-lying nuclear enrichment site at Fordow with 13.6-tonne (30,000lb) bunker-buster bombs, designed to penetrate 60 metres of rock.
On Monday night, the US defence secretary, Pete Hegseth, said he had “directed the deployment of additional capabilities” to US Central Command in the Middle East, an exercise he said was “to enhance our defensive posture in the region”.
Donald Trump, meanwhile, told reporters he was looking for “a real end” to the conflict as the US president returned to Washington having cut short his trip to the G7 summit in Canada. “I’m not looking for a ceasefire, we’re looking at better than a ceasefire,” he said, without being more specific.
However, clues that the Pentagon is considering a long-range air raid came from the movement of more than 31 US Air Force refuelling aircraft. The planes, mostly KC-135 Stratotankers and KC-46 Pegasuses, were tracked by AirNav Systems, a flight-tracking website, as they headed east towards Europe on Sunday. There were further reports of some planes flying further east on Tuesday.
US Air Force B-2 bombers have a long range, of about 6,000 miles without refuelling, but they usually operate from a limited number of bases: Whiteman in Missouri, Fairford in Oxfordshire and most notably the isolated base of Diego Garcia in the south Indian Ocean, now leased from Mauritius by the UK for the US.
B-2 bombers attacked five underground Houthi weapon facilities from Whiteman, 8,000 miles away, last October. Diego Garcia is far closer to Fordow, a 3,200-mile trip each way, which would require refuelling on the return leg once a bombing run on Iran’s nuclear sites had been completed.
Only the US is considered to have a bomb large enough – the GBU 57/B Massive Ordnance Penetrator – to possibly destroy Fordow, one of Iran’s two main uranium enrichment sites, estimated to be 80-90 metres below a mountain. The only plane certified to carry the 6-metre weapon is the B-2.
At one point in the middle of the last decade, the US was thought to have only 20 of the bombs, its largest non-nuclear weapon, but more recent estimates are higher.
Though Israel appears to have achieved dominance over Iran’s skies since it launched its attack on the country on Friday, it attacked Fordow on only the first day of the operation. The IAEA nuclear watchdog said on Monday that no damage to the enrichment plant had been seen.
Justin Bronk, an aviation expert with the Royal United Services Institute thinktank, said “multiple impacts” would almost certainly be required to destroy Fordow, “with the second bomb impacting inside the hole made by the first”.
Though a B-2 can carry two bunker-busting bombs, a serious assault by the US designed to eliminate the facility would probably require the deployment of more than one bomber. Bronk said: “An attack would require redundancy since the weapons have to function and be delivered perfectly to get down into the facility and explode at the right depth to cause critical damage.”
Satellite imagery in May showed the presence of six B-2 bombers at Diego Garcia, about half the total number considered operational at any one time – the US has a total of 19 – but there has not been any more recent reporting. Several companies supplying commercial satellite imaging also work for the US government.
According to a 2019 article in the New York Times, at some point a decade before, the US Pentagon constructed a replica of Fordow and test-bombed it with a 30,000lb device. A highly classified video of the attack was later shown by Leon Panetta, a defence secretary under Barack Obama’s presidency, to the Israeli politician Ehud Barak. “The bomb destroyed the mock-up in the desert,” the newspaper reported.
The US may also consider attacking Iran’s other nuclear enrichment site, at Natanz. Though a smaller overground site was destroyed by bombing on Friday, a facility somewhere between 8 and 12 metres underground is said by the IAEA to be relatively undamaged, though the Israeli military has disputed this.
An important question for the White House and the Pentagon is whether they believe, after five days of airstrikes by Israel, that there is any threat to US jets operating over Iran. But there is no shortage of military assets available if the US wants to mount an expanded attack targeting any remaining air defence and missile launch sites.
A second aircraft carrier strike group, led by the USS Nimitz was sent from east Asia towards the Middle East earlier this week, where it will join the USS Carl Vinson carrier, which is already operating relatively close to Iran, around the Arabian Sea. At least three US destroyers are now also in the eastern Mediterranean.
An 80-year-old man drove a car down the Spanish Steps in Rome early on Tuesday before getting stuck part way, municipal police said in a statement.
The man tested negative for alcohol, police said. They did not identify the driver or say if the car, a Mercedes-Benz, was his. Nor did they say whether or not he had been using a satnav.
Firefighters later used a crane to remove the vehicle. Police did not respond to requests for more details about the incident.
One of Rome’s most recognisable monuments, the Spanish Steps were never intended for motor vehicles, though some thrill seekers have tried their luck.
A Saudi man was charged with aggravated damage to cultural heritage after a surveillance camera recorded him driving a rented Maserati down the 135 travertine steps in 2022.
The Spanish Steps take their name from the Spanish embassy to the Holy See in a nearby square. A backdrop used in numerous films, they were built in the 1720s and have long been a popular spot.
The European Commission has insisted there will be no return to Russian gas, as it published plans to phase out fossil fuel imports from its eastern neighbour by 2028.
The EU energy commissioner, Dan Jørgensen, said a proposed ban on Russian gas imports would remain, irrespective of whether there was peace in Ukraine.
EU officials recalled when Russia cut gas supplies in 2006, 2009 and 2014, as well as the deliberate reduction in flows in 2021 before the full-scale invasion of Ukraine, which contributed to a huge rise in energy prices and surging inflation across the continent.
Under the proposals, European companies would be banned from importing Russian gas or providing services at EU liquified natural gas terminals to Russian customers. Any contracts entered into from today would have to be wound up by 1 January 2026, but companies with pre-existing agreements have a final deadline of 1 January 2028.
The proposal is facing a backlash from Hungary, Slovakia and Austria, but these countries are not thought to have enough support to block the plan from becoming EU law.
Jørgensen said plans to phase out Russian fossil fuels were not a response to the full-scale invasion of Ukraine. “This is a ban that we introduce because Russia has weaponised energy against us, because Russia has blackmailed member states in the EU, and therefore they are not a trading partner that can be trusted,” he said. “That also means that, irrespectively of whether there is a peace or not – which we all hope there will be of course – this ban will still stand.”
EU importers will be required to provide customs officers with detailed information about the source of gas to prevent any attempts to sell Russian imports under a new flag.
About 13% of EU gas imports is expected to come from Russia in 2025, compared with 45% in 2021. While Europe has cut supplies of pipeline gas from Russia, in 2024 it bought record amounts of Russian LNG, raising questions about the EU’s commitment to Ukraine and climate goals.
The commission expressed confidence that European companies terminating long-term gas contracts would not be liable for damages. Jørgensen said the EU ban was beyond any individual company’s control. “It is not them who are breaking the contract, it is indeed force majeure.”
The EU also wants to end imports of Russian oil by 2028, compared with 3% today and 27% in 2021.
But the latest proposal does not remove an exemption from the EU’s oil embargo granted to Hungary and Slovakia. When the EU agreed an oil import embargo in March 2023, the central European countries secured an opt-out that allowed them to continue to be supplied via the Soviet-era Druzhba pipeline. This carve-out, agreed under the EU’s sanctions regime, cannot be touched by this legislation, which has a different legal basis.
Hungary and Slovakia have sharply criticised the EU plans to phase out fossil fuels. Péter Szíjjártó, the Hungarian foreign minister, claimed Hungarian consumers could pay four times more for utilities, and he posted a video on social media on Monday in which he spoke over a dramatic action movie-style soundtrack. EU officials reject suggestions that prices would go up.
In more muted criticism, Austria’s energy ministry told the Financial Times that the EU should be open to resuming gas imports from Russia if there was a deal to end the war in Ukraine.
However, Lena Schilling, an Austrian Green MEP and former Fridays for the Future activist, called the stance shortsighted and morally irresponsible. “Have we learned nothing from bombed hospitals, abducted children and a war of aggression in the heart of Europe?” she asked.
Ukrainian diplomats have been left frustrated – and in some cases embittered – at Donald Trump’s refusal to make Ukraine a priority after Volodymyr Zelenskyy flew 5,000 miles to the G7 conference in Canada only for the US president to return home the night before the two leaders were due to meet. Trump said he needed to focus on the Israel-Iran conflict.
In a further blow for Kyiv the US vetoed a joint statement on Ukraine from the summit, on the grounds that the wording was too anti-Russian and could compromise negotiations with Vladimir Putin.
Instead, some of the language around the war will be included in Canadian prime minister Mark Carney’s “chair’s statement”.
Some Ukrainian officials said they were not sure now if it will be worth Zelenskyy attending the Nato summit in The Hague next week since there was no guarantee that Trump would attend.
One said: “It is an permanent hazard that Ukraine is a victim of events and Trump’s short attention span. Vladimir Putin knows that, which may be why there was such a large attack in Ukraine last night. There had been all sorts of promises for this summit – including new US arms deliveries being offered.” Ukraine was proposing to buy US weapons including new air defences, so getting round the Trump complaint that Ukraine is a drain on the US budget.
The German chancellor, Friedrich Merz, said Trump had promised to attend the Nato summit.
With the US chair at the G7 summit removed, Zelenskyy instead sat down with the other members of the group at a special session dedicated to Ukraine, but the central purpose of the session – to try to enlist Trump’s support to put pressure on Putin to agree a ceasefire – had been nullified by the US president’s abrupt departure announced to fellow G7 leaders in the afternoon. Zelenskyy was also due to have a one to one meeting with Trump.
The sense of upset, impossible for Ukraine to express in public due to the need to retain Trump’s support, was intensified by the fact that Zelenskyy was being relayed news of Russia’s massive attack across Ukraine as he flew by plane to the meeting in Canada.
As he met the G7 host, Canada’s Mark Carney, Zelenskyy made no direct reference to Trump’s decision to absent himself. Looking downbeat, he said: “We need the help of our allies to for our soldiers to stay strong until Russia is ready for peace negotiations.”
He stressed: “We are ready for an unconditional ceasefire.”
Zelenskyy had billed that the G7 summit as one of two golden chances to apply collective western pressure on Trump, and to discuss Ukraine’s plans to buy as much as $30bn to $50bn worth of air defense systems and weapons from the United States as a form of security guarantees.
There had been signals that the US was willing to sell the arms to Ukraine, but Trump – who spoke again to Putin this week – sometimes argues that providing Ukraine with arms will only prolong a war he is committed to ending.
Zelenskyy had also been seeking US agreement to a cut in the oil cap from $60 a barrel to $45 in a bid to cut Russian oil revenues. The oil price cap requiring complex enforcement was introduced by G7 nations and it would need at least tacit US support for it to be instituted effectively.
Although there has been a recent spike in the price of oil due to the Iranian crisis, the debate around lowering the price cap had become centre stage due to the slow fall in the price of oil. The European Commission president, Ursula von der Leyen, acknowledged the immediate pressure to lower the cap had been reduced.
In discussions at the summit, Trump on Monday expressed reluctance to impose any further sanctions, saying Europeans should “do it first” and that “sanctions cost us a lot of money, billions and billions of dollars”.
Sign up to This Week in Trumpland
A deep dive into the policies, controversies and oddities surrounding the Trump administration
after newsletter promotion
Keir Starmer meanwhile pushed for allies to tighten the oil price cap on Russia and announced sanctions on 20 Russian oil tankers as well as new measures targeting companies managing the vessels, Downing Street said on Tuesday.
Speaking to reporters on the sidelines of the G7 summit in Canada, the British prime minister said he “strongly” believed that restrictions on the price of Russian crude oil should be strengthened to deplete its energy revenues.
On the way to the G7, Zelenskyy had visited Austria to recruit the country as another potential mediator in the conflict with Russia. Austria has strong ties with Russia, and is seen by some Ukrainian leaders as a more trustworthy intermediary than Turkey, which has much to gain commercially from a peace settlement.
Speaking in Brussels, the EU foreign affairs chief, Kaja Kallas, addressed the latest Russian attacks, saying: “Russia remains unrelenting in its attacks, targeting civilians and prolonging its war. This is yet another sign: Russia is just not interested in peace, so we must keep up the pressure.”
The EU is close to agreeing an 18th package of sanctions that will include a ban on the importation of Russian oil refined by third-party countries and then exported to Europe. The EU plan intends to designate oil as Russian and therefore banned unless the importer has clear documentation demonstrating it has originated elsewhere. Countries will also have to publish new “diversification plans” showing how they will end reliance on both Russian oil and gas.
Kallas is convinced that although sanctions have taken longer than expected to have an impact, a corner has been turned.
She said last week: “Russia has lost tens of billions in oil revenues. Its economy is shrinking, and its GDP has dropped.” Sanctioning the “shadow fleet” [of unflagged Russian tankers] has been particularly impactful: after our last sanctions package, the 17th sanctions package, the oil exports from Russia via the Black Sea and Baltic Sea routes declined by 30% in a week.
“Only in the month of May, Russia’s sovereign wealth fund declined by $6bn, from $42bn to $36bn, and it could run out of money by next year. By cutting off revenue streams, we prevent them from refilling their war chest”.
Donald Trump has said he is not seeking a ceasefire in Israel’s war on Iran but instead wants to see a “complete give-up” by Iran, with Tehran abandoning its uranium enrichment “entirely”.
The US president predicted Israel would not let up in its bombing campaign and suggested a decisive moment in that campaign was imminent, though he made clear he expected Israel to destroy Iran’s nuclear facilities without US help.
“You’re going to find out over the next two days … Nobody’s slowed up so far,” he told CBS News after abruptly abandoning a G7 summit in the Canadian Rockies, saying he was returning to the White House to deal with the conflict.
Speaking to reporters on the way back to Washington, Trump said he was seeking “an end, a real end, not a ceasefire”.
That would involve a “complete give-up” by Iran, he said. Trump’s negotiating position before the Israeli attack was that Iran should stop uranium enrichment entirely, and he blamed Tehran for not accepting that proposal. On Tuesday he said an end to the conflict meant Iran “giving up entirely” on uranium enrichment.
Trump also stressed that any Iranian attack on Americans or US bases, which Iran has threatened, would be met with overwhelming force, saying: “We’ll come down so hard, it’d be gloves off.”
Iran’s foreign minister, Abbas Araghchi, said Iran was open to resuming talks with the US about its nuclear programme. “If President Trump is genuine about diplomacy and interested in stopping this war, next steps are consequential,” Araghchi said in a statement.
Trump, when asked whether he would dispatch his envoy Steve Witkoff or the vice-president, JD Vance, for direct talks with Iran, was noncommittal, saying it would depend “on what happens when I get back”. He later said: “I’m not too much in the mood to negotiate.”
Benjamin Netanyahu was also dismissive of the idea of diplomacy. “Of course they want to stop. They want to stop, and to keep producing the tools of death. We gave that a chance,” the Israeli prime minister said, laying out a new, expanded set of war aims.
“We want three central results: eliminating the nuclear programme, eliminating the ability to produce ballistic missiles and eliminating the axis of terror. We will obviously do what we must to achieve these objectives, and we have been coordinating well with the United States.”
Trump, on his online platform Truth Social overnight, was even more threatening than the Israelis, declaring: “Everyone should immediately evacuate Tehran!”, after an Israeli evacuation order for part of northern Tehran affecting a third of a million people, warning of the imminent bombing of the district.
The Israeli online order was modelled on those routinely issued to Palestinians in Gaza, where bombing by the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) has flattened entire residential neighbourhoods over the course of a 20-month conflict.
The Israeli ultimatum on Monday said the bombing of Tehran would be aimed at “military infrastructure”, but one of the targets hit was a state television station, killing three staff and ending live broadcasts. Israel has also been bombing Iran’s oil and gas installations, and Iran has retaliated with strikes on Haifa, damaging a power station and a refinery in the Mediterranean port.
Israeli airstrikes killed at least 24 Iranians across the country on Tuesday morning, bringing the toll since Friday’s surprise attack to at least 224 people dead and more than 1,400 injured, Iran’s health ministry said. The scale of destruction and the threats from the IDF and Trump triggered an exodus of Tehranis, jamming the roads out of the capital overnight.
In Israel, the death toll by Tuesday morning was 24, with about 600 injured. Iran fired a total of 20 to 30 missiles on Tuesday morning, according to the IDF, lightly wounding five people, marking a significant drop in the tempo of its attack compared with the previous few days.
Sign up to First Thing
Our US morning briefing breaks down the key stories of the day, telling you what’s happening and why it matters
after newsletter promotion
The IDF said Iran had used 370 missiles in eight salvoes out of a US-estimated arsenal of 3,000 ballistic missiles. The IDF further claims to have destroyed 200 of Iran’s missile launchers, half the total, and to be hunting the remainder, continually constricting Tehran’s ability to retaliate.
Israel has also struck a severe blow to Iran’s chain of command, killing at least 11 top generals and in some cases their replacements. On Tuesday the IDF said it had killed the acting armed forces commander, Maj Gen Ali Shadmani, who had been in the post for only four days, after his predecessor was targeted in the first wave of strikes on Friday morning.
“Iran is completely naked and we have full freedom of action. This is an unprecedented achievement,” an IDF general staff officer told the newspaper Yedioth Ahronoth.
If IDF claims of its dominance are borne out, it will leave Iran with few cards to play. The Iranian parliament has prepared a bill that would withdraw Iran from the 1968 nuclear non-proliferation treaty, so that it would no longer be legally bound to forgo nuclear weapons, but the government insists it remains opposed to all weapons of mass destruction.
State TV has also aired calls from hardline politicians suggesting that Iran block the strategically important strait of Hormuz, potentially stopping the passage of more than 17m barrels of oil a day and producing a dramatic spike in world oil prices and global inflation.
Trump’s abrupt departure from the G7 summit in Canada, coupled with the eastward deployment of significant numbers of US military aircraft, had provoked speculation that Trump was contemplating US participation in the offensive, contributing bombers and huge penetrating munitions that experts say are necessary to destroy deeply buried Iranian uranium enrichment plants.
When asked about US involvement, Trump responded that the Iranian nuclear programme “is wiped out long before that”.
A White House spokesperson, Alex Pfeiffer, denied reports of US participation in Israeli offensive operations. “American forces are maintaining their defensive posture, and that has not changed. We will defend American interests,” Pfeiffer wrote.
As Donald Trump publicly threatens to join Israel in attacking Iran, an unlikely coalition of lawmakers has moved to prevent the president from involving US forces in the conflict without Congress’s approval.
On Tuesday, Republican congressman Thomas Massie, whose libertarian-tinged politics have often put him at odds with Trump, joined with several progressive Democrats to introduce in the House of Representatives a war powers resolution that would require a vote by Congress before Trump could attack Iran. Democrat Tim Kaine has introduced companion legislation in the Senate.
“This is not our war. But if it were, Congress must decide such matters according to our Constitution,” Massie wrote on X in announcing the resolution. Democrats Ilhan Omar and Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez replied “signing on” to the tweet, while Massie’s office later announced that several others, including chair of the Congressional Progressive Caucus, Greg Casar, would also sponsor the resolution.
The resolutions’ introductions came hours after Trump left a G7 summit in Canada early to return to Washington DC and demand Iran’s “unconditional surrender” following days of Israeli airstrikes that have targeted its top military leaders and nuclear facilities.
The White House later denied media reports circulating that the US had decided to become involved in the conflict, with spokesperson Alex Pfeiffer saying: “American forces are maintaining their defensive posture, and that has not changed. We will defend American interests.” However, US military aircraft and sea vessels have moved into the Middle East, and Iran’s deepest nuclear facilities are thought to be penetrable only by a bunker-busting bomb possessed by the US alone.
Trump campaigned on keeping the United States out of foreign wars, and this past weekend, JD Vance told army troops at a military parade in Washington DC: “We never ask you to go to war unless you absolutely have to.”
Trump vetoed two War Powers resolutions during his first term, which concerned Iran and Yemen, and has called for a primary challenge against Massie for opposing his priorities.
Such resolutions are privileged, meaning they must come up for a vote, though House Republican leaders have lately taken unorthodox steps to undermine efforts targeting issues like tariffs.
In an interview, Democratic congressman Ro Khanna, who co-sponsored the resolution with Massie, warned that if they do that, “they really will be then angering their Republican base,” pointing to Trump and the vice-president’s anti-war pronouncements.
Sign up to This Week in Trumpland
A deep dive into the policies, controversies and oddities surrounding the Trump administration
after newsletter promotion
“This is an opportunity for the Democrats to become the anti-war party again,” Khanna added. “Our leadership should be vocal on this, and calling Trump out on this, upholding his promise to be anti war.”
He predicted the resolution would “pass if we bring it to the floor” in the House, where the Republican party holds a mere three-seat majority. But it is unclear if enough crossover support will materialize.
Marjorie Taylor Greene, a rightwing Republican who has spoken out against US involvement in Israel’s air campaign against Iran, told the Guardian: “While I’m opposed to America’s involvement in foreign wars and regime change, I do not see a need to sign on to Rep. Massie’s war powers resolution yet as we are not attacking Iran. I trust President Trump will deliver his campaign promises and turn this dangerous conflict between Israel and Iran into peace without war. If the situation changes, then I may sign on. We’ll see what happens.”
The UK will look into penalising countries that refuse to take back people who are refused asylum by making visa applications for their nationals harder, Keir Starmer has said at the G7 summit in Canada.
Asked during a media Q&A about ways to reduce the number of people arriving irregularly, the prime minister said it would have a more “transactional” approach to granting visas for countries depending on their cooperation with returns.
This would also be the case, he said, for countries that did not cooperate on efforts to prevent their nationals heading towards Europe and potentially the UK to claim asylum.
Describing a G7 session on migration at the summit in Kananaskis, Alberta, on Monday, Starmer said: “I made clear that we are looking at issues like a smarter use of our visas, looking at whether we should tie our visas to the work that the countries we’re dealing with are doing on preventive measures and on return agreements.”
The UK currently has returns deals with 11 nations including Albania, India, Pakistan, Vietnam, Iraq, Nigeria and Bangladesh, meaning people refused asylum can be swiftly sent back. This process is seen as a notable disincentive, with the number of Albanian nationals seeking asylum in the UK having dropped sharply.
“We’ve done a number of bilateral returns agreements,” Starmer said. “So the question is, again, whether it’s possible to go a bit beyond that. We are including looking at whether we can’t be a bit smarter with the use of our visas in return in relation to countries that don’t have a returns agreement with us.”
This would be, he added, more “transactional” in approach.
More widely, Starmer said he had spoken with France’s president, Emmanuel Macron, the Italian prime minister, Giorgia Meloni, and Friedrich Merz, the German chancellor, about asylum and small boats.
He said: “I think we need to strengthen our existing tools, but then go further and see what else we can do. And that is a piece of work we’re looking at with the French in particular.”
At the joint session on migration, Starmer said, he also put out proposals on “counter-terrorism, powers and sanctions”.
He added: “I obviously raised it specifically, and indeed in detail, with President Macron, and in terms of the specific actions that I want us to take together, as I did with Giorgia Meloni, slightly more upstream with her, which is where she’s shown some success in reducing her own numbers, and with Friedrich Merz as well, because some of the boats are transiting through Germany.”
Air India flight AI171 took off from Ahmedabad airport on the afternoon of 12 June with 242 people on board. Less than a minute later, it had crashed into a medical college about 1km away.
Including those on the ground, at least 270 people were killed. But one passenger miraculously survived. Vishwash Kumar Ramesh, a British national sat in seat 11A, was able to walk away from the scene – though, as he found out soon after, his brother had died on board.
The aviation journalist Jeff Wise explains what investigators will be looking at to determine the cause the crash – from the plane’s landing gear, to its wing flaps and possible pilot error. Helen Pidd asks how it was possible that Ramesh was able to escape with his life.
Last month, Sir Keir Starmer promised to do “everything I possibly can” to free Egypt’s highest profile political prisoner, Alaa Abd el-Fattah. A few months earlier, the foreign secretary had described the case of the British-Egyptian writer and campaigner as the “number one issue”. In opposition, David Lammy had joined a protest in Mr Abd el-Fattah’s support outside the Foreign Office and demanded serious diplomatic consequences for Cairo if no progress was made.
Progress has not been made and time is running out. Arbitrary detention has stolen almost a decade of Mr Abd el-Fattah’s life, while that of his remarkable mother, Laila Soueif, may be drawing to its close. As of Tuesday, the 69-year-old, who lives in London, had not eaten for 261 days, as she demands her son’s release. After taking 300-calorie liquid supplements for a short period, she returned to a full hunger strike almost a month ago and has been hospitalised since the end of May. In Egypt, Mr Abd el-Fattah has been on hunger strike for more than 100 days.
Mr Abd el-Fattah, whose current ordeal began when he was detained in 2019, should never have been held. He was sentenced to five years for “spreading false news”; his real offence was to speak truth to power. But the injustice was compounded when, instead of releasing him in September, as Egypt’s own criminal code requires, the state chose to ignore his pre-trial detention. His jail term was deemed to have begun only after his conviction in December 2021, meaning that it would run until the end of next year.
The UN working group on arbitrary detention found last month that his detention was unlawful on multiple grounds, including the lack of arrest warrant, violation of his right to free expression and the lack of a fair trial. His 13-year-old son, who lives in Brighton, has been denied the chance to know his father.
In over a decade in office, Gen Abdel Fatah al-Sisi, Egypt’s president, has proved to be even more repressive than his former boss, Hosni Mubarak, who was overthrown in the Arab spring. Executions have soared, and more than 1,500 political prisoners were detained last year alone. Sir Keir has twice raised Mr Abd el-Fattah’s case directly in calls with Gen Sisi, and has written to him multiple times. Yet Britain has not even gained consular access to the 43-year-old. Egypt has released dual nationals before when under pressure. It appears particularly obdurate in this case.
Supporters have made a strong case for imposing sanctions and bringing a case at the international court of justice. Given the health of Mr Abd el-Fattah and Ms Soueif, however, the priority must be measures with immediate effect. The first should be to change travel advice, warning against travelling to Egypt, and to refuse trade talks. Mr Abd el-Fattah’s case clearly indicates the risks for Britons, given the lack of fair process and consular access. Egypt’s economy, which remains fragile following an International Monetary Fund bailout last year, is heavily dependent on tourism and around half a million Britons travel there every year.
The prime minister’s advocacy is welcome. But as Mr Lammy demanded in 2022, “what diplomatic price has Egypt paid for denying the right of consular access to a British citizen?” It is clear that Britain has not, in fact, done everything it possibly can to change the Egyptian government’s mind. It must now do so.
Do you have an opinion on the issues raised in this article? If you would like to submit a response of up to 300 words by email to be considered for publication in our letters section, please click here.
The conflict began on Friday when Israel launched predawn strikes that hit more than 100 targets, including nuclear facilities and missile sites, and killed senior military commanders and scientists. That attack set off an escalating series of tit-for-tat exchanges, raising fears of a wider, more dangerous regional war.
Residential areas in both countries have suffered deadly strikes since the hostilities broke out. As of Monday, Iran’s health ministry said 224 people had been killed and 1,277 injured. On Tuesday, Israel said 24 people had been killed and 592 injured.
Nuclear facilitiesIsrael’s operation has included strikes on Iran’s uranium enrichment sites at Natanz and Fordow, and a uranium conversion facility at Isfahan.
Video footage posted online on Friday showed the aftermath of an explosion at Natanz, Iran’s most significant nuclear enrichment facility.
Satellite imagery showed damage to the electrical substation that powers the plant, and the above-ground pilot fuel enrichment plant, which hosts hundreds of centrifuges. The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) said on Monday there was “no indication of a physical attack” on an underground section of the site.
Four buildings have been damaged at Isfahan, the IAEA said on Monday, adding that no damage had been seen at Fordow, which is deeply buried beneath a mountain.
Military installationsIsrael claims to have destroyed 120 Iranian surface-to-surface missile launchers, amounting to a third of the regime’s total stockpile, and said on Monday it had “total air superiority in the skies over Tehran”. It has also hit missile development and production sites. Israel has overstated claims for military success in the past and the claims are unverifiable.
Strikes have been reported at military bases in Bid Kaneh, Kermanshah and Parchin, and airports in Mashhad, Mehrabad and Tabriz, where a missile complex has also been hit.
Energy facilitiesIsrael has hit energy targets including gas processing facilities at South Pars, the world’s largest natural gasfield, storage tanks in Rey to the south of Tehran and a fuel depot in Shahran in the capital’s north, where footage from Sunday showed huge fireballs rising from the site.
Tehran strikesIsrael has bombarded the Iranian capital since Friday, and said it targeted 80 sites in the city on Saturday night alone, including the Iranian ministry of defence. Several residential buildings have been hit, including complexes for military commanders, resulting in the deaths of much of the top echelon of the Iranian military command.
Footage from security cameras showed two of the explosions during the first wave of attacks on Friday.
Footage from the aftermath of the initial strikes showed tall buildings on fire and people out on the streets.
On Monday, Israel struck a state television building in Tehran during a live broadcast. Footage from the aftermath showed the building on fire and the charred remains of office equipment.
Iranian missiles have hit Israeli locations including Tel Aviv, Bat Yam, Haifa, Rehovot, Bnei Brak, Petah Tikva and Tamra.
This annotated satellite image shows damage to buildings near Israel’s defence headquarters in Tel Aviv.
Drone footage captured the aftermath of a missile strike in Bat Yam, near Tel Aviv, on Israel’s Mediterranean coast, in the early hours of Sunday morning.
CCTV and drone footage captured the moment an Iranian missile hit a residential building complex in Petah Tikva, east of Tel Aviv, on Monday, and the aftermath of the strike.
Israeli reporting restrictions limit the ability to assess what if any damage has been done to strategic locations, and in previous exchanges Israel has minimised the effectiveness of Iranian missile fire.
Whenever I need to leave a boring party, I always get my press secretary to tweet the apologies, and so it was that White House spokesmonster Karoline Leavitt informed X users in the dead of night that Donald Trump had ditched the G7 after barely 24 hours of mid-price hotel drabness, thus avoiding the possibility of getting cornered by Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskyy in the kitchen. Trump later said he had to leave the summit “for obvious reasons”, though failed to elaborate whether he meant he’d been expected to talk with leaders, not at them, or simply that the trouser press in his room was broken.
You probably can’t call it a French exit if the French president then claims you left early to work on a ceasefire. But you can definitely up the stakes on Le Bumptious by calling him “publicity-seeking”, someone who “always gets it wrong”, and adding – almost by way of an afterthought – that all Iranians should “immediately evacuate” Tehran. (Population: 9.8 million.)
Incidentally, how are your tension headaches these days? I woke up at 2am with a blinder and nothing to do in the small hours but diagnostic detective work. Had I slept in a draught? Ground my teeth? Was I dehydrated? No, no and no. Once you have eliminated the impossible, I suppose you just have to face it: the less-improbable-by-the-day threat of total conflagration might just be the explanation.
But look, hopefully this is all just the relaxing buildup to Iran signing a nuclear deal? If so, someone should tell Trump’s beloved stock market, which doesn’t love the increased tensions in the Middle East since Israel began striking nuclear and military targets in Iran on Friday. Furthermore, it has yet to alight on either a fight or flight reflex following Trump’s delphic pronouncement – probably posted in the middle of the night while on the Air Force One toilet – that something “much bigger” is coming. Nor can it ignore the fact that Trump’s wasn’t even the first evacuation order for Tehran in the past day, with Israel having already issued one on Monday afternoon.
The US president has made clear his impatient incredulity that Iran did not sign a deal to largely dismantle its nuclear programme in the various forms it has been on the table. Then again, it was only five incredibly long years ago that Trump thought Israel and Palestine should sign his son-in-law Jared Kushner’s “deal of the century”, which the two sides somehow resisted, no doubt leaving present-day Kushner staring into one of his many infinity pools and sighing: “I could have made it SO easy for them.”
As for who could next give statecraft a whirl, anyone underwhelmed by the thought of Trump’s envoy Steve Witkoff meeting Iranian leaders should prepare for an even bigger tension headache at the prospect of Trump’s other floated idea – that he might send vice-president JD Vance to meet them. That would certainly be a face-off for the age, given how well all of Vance’s other forays into the art of international diplomacy have gone. Nato, Ukraine, Greenland – he’ll have enough for a greatest shits album soon.
But back to the G7, which today is somehow trying to carry on without its central character – a bit like The Office did after Steve Carell left. It’s hard when you’ve spent days of buildup reading that a G7 in the age of second-term Trump is effectively The Donald Show. He is the centre of gravity, everything revolves around him – pick your physics metaphor, basically, then try to imagine a post-physics G7/G6/G-also-rans/Gee why don’t we just sack the whole thing off and go hiking in the Rockies.
You just know that all the other leaders are relieved that it’s Emmanuel Macron, and not them, getting it right in the truth-socials. It was barely two weeks ago that Macron was the beneficiary of one of Trump’s lethal expressions of support, with the president breaking off from his farewell-to-Elon-Musk press conference to reassure reporters that despite poor old Macron appearing to have been shoved by his wife on his presidential plane, “he’s fine”.
The one thing Trump did have time for was signing the much-vaunted US-UK trade deal, which he unveiled to the media at a photocall with grateful supplicant Keir Starmer, before dropping the papers all over the floor. The UK prime minister promptly scrabbled around to pick up what he could, which should in no way be regarded as a metaphor for the fact he is celebrating having a 10% tariff on car exports that didn’t exist a few months ago, on the basis that it is no longer 27.5%. Trump made zero attempt to help pick up the mess he’d made, which apparently should also not be regarded as a metaphor. And there was precisely nothing on lifting the 25% steel tariff, much less that the next stage of the deal will include Tata Steel. Forget metaphors here – that would be simply and literally bad.
As for the rather bigger story of the day, we’re probably at the stage of wondering which lucky journalist will be accidentally added to the group chat ahead of any US military strike in Iran, and get all the juicy operational details and high-end bitching in real time. Would you like that ringside seat? Or do you think it’s the one thing guaranteed to give even your headache a headache?
Marina Hyde is a Guardian columnist
Whenever I need to leave a boring party, I always get my press secretary to tweet the apologies, and so it was that White House spokesmonster Karoline Leavitt informed X users in the dead of night that Donald Trump had ditched the G7 after barely 24 hours of mid-price hotel drabness, thus avoiding the possibility of getting cornered by Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskyy in the kitchen. Trump later said he had to leave the summit “for obvious reasons”, though failed to elaborate whether he meant he’d been expected to talk with leaders, not at them, or simply that the trouser press in his room was broken.
You probably can’t call it a French exit if the French president then claims you left early to work on a ceasefire. But you can definitely up the stakes on Le Bumptious by calling him “publicity-seeking”, someone who “always gets it wrong”, and adding – almost by way of an afterthought – that all Iranians should “immediately evacuate” Tehran. (Population: 9.8 million.)
Incidentally, how are your tension headaches these days? I woke up at 2am with a blinder and nothing to do in the small hours but diagnostic detective work. Had I slept in a draught? Ground my teeth? Was I dehydrated? No, no and no. Once you have eliminated the impossible, I suppose you just have to face it: the less-improbable-by-the-day threat of total conflagration might just be the explanation.
But look, hopefully this is all just the relaxing buildup to Iran signing a nuclear deal? If so, someone should tell Trump’s beloved stock market, which doesn’t love the increased tensions in the Middle East since Israel began striking nuclear and military targets in Iran on Friday. Furthermore, it has yet to alight on either a fight or flight reflex following Trump’s delphic pronouncement – probably posted in the middle of the night while on the Air Force One toilet – that something “much bigger” is coming. Nor can it ignore the fact that Trump’s wasn’t even the first evacuation order for Tehran in the past day, with Israel having already issued one on Monday afternoon.
The US president has made clear his impatient incredulity that Iran did not sign a deal to largely dismantle its nuclear programme in the various forms it has been on the table. Then again, it was only five incredibly long years ago that Trump thought Israel and Palestine should sign his son-in-law Jared Kushner’s “deal of the century”, which the two sides somehow resisted, no doubt leaving present-day Kushner staring into one of his many infinity pools and sighing: “I could have made it SO easy for them.”
As for who could next give statecraft a whirl, anyone underwhelmed by the thought of Trump’s envoy Steve Witkoff meeting Iranian leaders should prepare for an even bigger tension headache at the prospect of Trump’s other floated idea – that he might send vice-president JD Vance to meet them. That would certainly be a face-off for the age, given how well all of Vance’s other forays into the art of international diplomacy have gone. Nato, Ukraine, Greenland – he’ll have enough for a greatest shits album soon.
But back to the G7, which today is somehow trying to carry on without its central character – a bit like The Office did after Steve Carell left. It’s hard when you’ve spent days of buildup reading that a G7 in the age of second-term Trump is effectively The Donald Show. He is the centre of gravity, everything revolves around him – pick your physics metaphor, basically, then try to imagine a post-physics G7/G6/G-also-rans/Gee why don’t we just sack the whole thing off and go hiking in the Rockies.
You just know that all the other leaders are relieved that it’s Emmanuel Macron, and not them, getting it right in the truth-socials. It was barely two weeks ago that Macron was the beneficiary of one of Trump’s lethal expressions of support, with the president breaking off from his farewell-to-Elon-Musk press conference to reassure reporters that despite poor old Macron appearing to have been shoved by his wife on his presidential plane, “he’s fine”.
The one thing Trump did have time for was signing the much-vaunted US-UK trade deal, which he unveiled to the media at a photocall with grateful supplicant Keir Starmer, before dropping the papers all over the floor. The UK prime minister promptly scrabbled around to pick up what he could, which should in no way be regarded as a metaphor for the fact he is celebrating having a 10% tariff on car exports that didn’t exist a few months ago, on the basis that it is no longer 27.5%. Trump made zero attempt to help pick up the mess he’d made, which apparently should also not be regarded as a metaphor. And there was precisely nothing on lifting the 25% steel tariff, much less that the next stage of the deal will include Tata Steel. Forget metaphors here – that would be simply and literally bad.
As for the rather bigger story of the day, we’re probably at the stage of wondering which lucky journalist will be accidentally added to the group chat ahead of any US military strike in Iran, and get all the juicy operational details and high-end bitching in real time. Would you like that ringside seat? Or do you think it’s the one thing guaranteed to give even your headache a headache?
Marina Hyde is a Guardian columnist
A Swedish entrepreneur who once called herself the “queen of trash” has been sentenced to six years in prison for illegally dumping hundreds of thousands of tonnes of toxic waste in the country’s biggest environmental crime case.
Fariba Vancor, previously known as Bella Nilsson and the former chief executive of waste management company Think Pink, was convicted on Tuesday of 19 counts of serious environmental crimes. Her ex-husband Thomas Nilsson was found guilty of 12 counts of serious environmental crimes and sentences to three years and six months in prison.
Of the 11 people who went on trial in September, all but one of them were convicted of environmental crimes by the Södertörn district court in Huddinge, near Stockholm.
Niklas Schüllerqvist, one of the judges in the case, said Think Pink’s dumping had posed “great risks to people and the environment” and compared the business to “a kind of pyramid scheme”.
“Waste management has been deficient or incorrect to a significant extent. It has also caused environmental damage through emissions and, in some cases, great risks to people and the environment,” he said. “There is therefore no doubt that there have been environmental crimes at the places where the waste has been handled.”
Think Pink was hired to dispose of unwanted waste – largely building materials – by municipalities, building companies, apartment cooperatives and individuals. But the company did not deal with it appropriately, instead abandoning the unsorted waste illegally in piles at 19 locations across Sweden.
High levels of toxic PCB compounds, lead, mercury, arsenic and chemicals were released into the air, soil and water, posing a danger to human, animal and plant life.
On Tuesday, five of the accused, including Vancor and Nilsson, were sentenced to prison for between two and six years for serious environmental crimes and five others were sentenced to shorter prison sentences or suspended sentences for environmental crimes.
The person who was acquitted was Think Pink’s former chief executive, the TV personality Leif-Ivan Karlsson.
The five main defendants were ordered to pay about a quarter of a billion kronor (£19m) in damages, including to Botkyrka municipality and the city of Västerås.
The case was the largest ever handled by Sweden’s national unit for environmental and work environment cases, involving a multi-year legal process and more than 80 days of hearings. The verdict was almost 700 pages long.
Sign up to Down to Earth
The planet's most important stories. Get all the week's environment news - the good, the bad and the essential
after newsletter promotion
“It was a very extensive investigation – 150 witnesses and experts have been heard, as well as around 20 plaintiffs,” Schüllerqvist said.
All defendants denied wrongdoing. During the trial, Vancor said she had “followed the law”.
Her defence team said it was surprised by Tuesday’s verdict. “It was a little unexpected,” lawyer Jan Tibbling told the newspaper Aftonbladet, adding: “Of course, we’re not happy.”
He said he had yet to speak to his client to discuss whether to lodge an appeal.
The US immigration system is a scam that dehumanizes people for profit. Communities across the country have had enough.
The protests in Los Angeles have invited a long overdue conversation about the true nature of the US immigration system. While the immediate catalysts for the protests were ramped up Ice raids attempting to meet Donald Trump’s arbitrary deportation quotas, the protests spring from a deeper history.
In reality, the protests reflect decades-long frustrations with an abusive immigration system designed to dehumanize immigrants, weaken workers and keep wealth flowing upward. Ice’s recent tactics were only the last straw.
Excellent articles have shed light on why Los Angeles in particular, with generations of immigrant communities and a history of immigrant rights movements, has emerged as an epicenter of resistance. Whether immigrants themselves, or families, neighbors, coworkers, or friends of immigrants, people in these communities have long experienced the trauma of a system that renders people “illegal” just for doing basic things like getting a job. Similar statements could be made for other major sites of protest such as New Jersey, New York, Chicago, Denver and Houston.
While much of the news coverage has turned toward the US president’s mobilization of the military and what that means for his growing authoritarian tendencies, this is only half the story. To fully understand what is at stake in the protests, we can’t lose sight of the thing that drove people to protest in the first place: a violently unfair immigration system that is an affront to us all.
It is worth noting that this immigration system is not an original component of US governance. Whereas the first government under the US constitution formed in 1789, there were no federal immigration laws until the Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882, and even this law was limited in the sense that it banned a specific class of immigrants. The US did not have closed borders until the Immigration Act of 1924, which established national origins quotas across the board.
The primary justifications for these early immigration laws were xenophobia, eugenics, and overt racism. By the 1990s, however, multinational corporations understood that closed borders – especially combined with free trade agreements freeing multinational companies to shop around for “cheap” workers, while at the same time constraining the options of workers to move around and look for better jobs – were a powerful weapon in their arsenal to squeeze ever more profit out of global supply chains. While cleverly hidden behind discourses of “security” and “sovereignty,” our immigration system is actually a scam rigged to guarantee an upward flow of wealth at the cost of human rights.
The North American Free Trade Agreement (Nafta) illustrates this dynamic. Signed in 1992, Nafta created a free trade zone among Mexico, Canada and the US, specifically making it easier for goods, capital and corporations to move freely while conspicuously ignoring the movement of workers. Far from an oversight, as the scholar Bill Ong Hing has written, this was the whole point of the agreement.
While no US labor unions or other human rights representatives had a seat at the table, the US advisory committee for trade and negotiations – composed almost entirely of representatives of multinational corporations – led the negotiations, ensuring that the agreement followed corporate interests. The drafters wanted easier access to cheaper Mexican labor, but they understood that if Mexicans had the same rights as companies to cross borders in search of better opportunities, then the “invisible hand” of supply and demand might make this labor less cheap. Accordingly, immigration restrictions helped to rig the game. In line with these interests, the Clinton administration, in power when the agreement took effect in 1994, not only went along with the plan to leave immigrants out of the deal, but also doubled down on closed borders with harsh new measures to restrict immigration through the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act (IIRIRA) of 1996.
Ultimately, Nafta and the IIRIRA worked hand-in-hand to trap Mexican workers and give artificial negotiating advantages to multinational corporations. The mechanism made sure that Mexicans would have to either stay put on their side of the border and tolerate whatever working conditions were available, or live without legal status if they did “vote with their feet” to seek better opportunities in the US. In either case, they were far more vulnerable to exploitation. Unsurprisingly, this harmed workers all around, especially Mexicans, leading to stagnant wages, harsh working conditions, and irregular migration that forced people into an exploitative informal economy, even as productivity and corporate profits soared.
Significantly, Nafta was not an isolated case, but rather an embodiment of how the US immigration system enshrines this major power imbalance between labor and capital. In fact, the same Clinton administration and private sector advisory committee that oversaw the implementation Nafta also played a key role in creating the World Trade Organization in 1995 following similar principles. Today, multinational corporations continue to move freely around the world, while people seeking a better life continue to face restrictive borders enforced by state violence.
At the same time, we as taxpayers pay increasingly absurd sums of money for the violent border security measures that keep this system in place. The American Immigration Council has calculated that since 1994, the annual budget for the US Border Patrol has risen from $400m dollars to more than $7bn in 2024 – an increase of over 700% even when factoring in inflation. They further estimate that since the creation of the Department of Homeland Security in 2003, the federal government has spent more than $400bn dollars on the various agencies that carry out immigration enforcement.
Under the current Trump administration, these numbers are set to soar even further. In the same “big, beautiful” spending bill that is already facing backlash for slashing public programs while offering enormous tax cuts to the wealthiest Americans, a massive increase in spending for Trump’s signature deportation plan is included. The Congressional Budget Office (CBO) estimates that this will add $168bn to the deficit over the next five years – already an extreme amount – though the Cato Institute has noted that the CBO calculation left out key variables. In fact, Cato finds that the number could actually be closer to $1tn.
In short, our immigration system is a massive grift. It divides communities, separates families, hurts workers, and subjects people to state violence for doing normal things like working at an Italian restaurant or going to church on Mother’s Day. And we as taxpayers subsidize the companies profiting on this abusive system.
As I have previously written, the Trump administration has distinguished itself from previous governments by intentionally targeting legal immigrants. However, as protesters flood the streets with signs saying “No One is Illegal,” the deeper significance of this protest movement becomes clear. The message is that someone’s right to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness shouldn’t depend on their immigration status. And it certainly shouldn’t depend on the whims of multinational corporations who have essentially coopted violent border enforcement for their own profits.
As a final thought, I think people are also tired of all the gaslighting. Despite the barrage of official rhetoric claiming that tough immigration measures are for our own good – that they make our communities safer, that they protect jobs, that we shouldn’t feel bad because immigrants don’t deserve to be treated as we would want to be treated ourselves – we know from both academic analysis and our lived experiences that these are all vicious lies, and the policies that spring from these lies have deadly consequences for real human beings. For me, the recent protests demonstrate that communities across the country are standing up to reject these lies.
As I think about the significance of this movement, I am reminded of a passage from Karla Cornejo Villavicencio’s 2020 book The Undocumented Americans. Reflecting on the power of storytelling as a counterweight to the deluge of dehumanizing assaults immigrants face on a daily basis, she concludes: “What if this is how, in the face of so much sacrilege and slander, we reclaim our dead?”
People are protesting because they are fed up. And they are right to be.
Daniel Mendiola is a professor of Latin American history and migration studies at Vassar College
The unprecedented blackout that brought the Iberian peninsula to a standstill at the end of April was caused by surging voltages triggering “a chain reaction of disconnections” that shut down the power network, an expert report commissioned by the Spanish government has found.
Speaking to reporters on Tuesday afternoon, the country’s environment minister, Sara Aagesen, ruled out a cyber-attack as the cause of the outage on 28 April, saying it had been down to a “multifactorial” system failure caused by the network’s inability to control grid voltage.
The minister said the system had lacked “sufficient capacity to control the dynamic voltage” because Spain’s national grid operator, Red Eléctrica, did not have enough thermal power stations online to control the surge. She also noted that some of the power-generating companies paid to manage and absorb voltage surges had failed to do so.
The catastrophic power loss, which left people in Spain and Portugal without trains, metros, traffic lights, ATMs, phone connections and internet access, led the government to commission the expert report.
Aagesen said the blackout had a “multifactorial origin … In other words, it was caused by the confluence of a combination of factors. The cause of the zero [-power event] was a phenomenon of surging tensions [and] a chain reaction of control disconnections that cause further disconnections.”
The expert investigations focused on what happened at 12.33pm on Monday 28 April when, for five seconds, 15GW of the energy being produced – equivalent to 60% of all the energy being used – suddenly disappeared.
Aagesen said the research had uncovered “voltage instability” on the morning of the blackout and in the days leading up to it, followed by “oscillations” in the system between noon and 12.30pm that day.
“A second phase saw power losses, and a third phase led to the peninsular collapse,” she added.
The minister said the report’s key recommendations included strengthening supervision and compliance, and ensuring that Spain was properly protected against future voltage fluctuations.
She defended the socialist-led government’s commitment to increased use of renewable energy, which some had sought to portray as the cause of the blackout.
“We have a solid narrative of events and a verified explanation that allows us to reflect and to act as we surely will,” said Aagesen. “We believe in the energy transition and we know it’s not an ideological question but one of this country’s principal vectors of growth when it comes to re-industrialisation opportunities.”
Aagesen and the prime minister, Pedro Sánchez, have repeatedly rejected any suggestion that the blackout had been caused by the rush to abandon nuclear power in favour of renewables. “Those who link this incident to the lack of nuclear power are frankly lying or demonstrating their ignorance,” Sánchez said the day after the power cut, adding that nuclear power generation “was no more resilient” than other electricity sources.
Aagesen had also previously said that Spain’s electricity on the day in question was generated from a tried-and-tested mix of different sources, with solar power accounting for almost 55% of the total, followed by 10% from wind power, 10% from nuclear power and almost 10% from hydro power.
“The system has worked to perfection with a similar demand situation and with a similar energetic mix [in the past], so pointing the finger at renewables when the system has functioned perfectly in the same context doesn’t seem very appropriate,” she said at the time.
The government and the president of Red Eléctrica have also denied media reports that the failure was caused by a government experiment with renewable energy production on the day of the blackout. “That’s entirely false,” the operator’s president, Beatriz Corredor, told La Vanguardia last month. “It’s a cathedral-sized piece of fake news.”
The report’s publication comes as Sánchez struggles to contain the fallout from a series of corruption allegations that have engulfed his administration and his Spanish Socialist Workers’ party (PSOE).
Last week, the prime minister apologised to voters but ruled out a snap election after a senior PSOE member resigned hours after a supreme court judge found “firm evidence” of his possible involvement in taking kickbacks on public construction contracts.
He has insisted he is doing all he can to tackle corruption and said there would be no return to the polls until the next scheduled general election, in 2027. “This isn’t about me or the socialist party or PSOE MPs; it’s about a political project that’s doing good things for the country,” he said last Thursday.
He has also sought to contrast his approach to corruption with that of the opposition conservative People’s party, which he ousted from government with a no-confidence motion after a major PP graft scandal eight years ago.
Like many people, reaching the age of 40 inspired Matt to do some self-reflection. He had achieved many hallmarks of adulthood: a college degree, a career he enjoyed, and two beloved dogs. But he’d never had a relationship, or even a sexual partner.
This weighed heavy on him; he craved the experience of a deep romantic connection and wondered how it might feel to be in love.
Matt, who is using a pseudonym, grew up in a fundamentalist Christian household where sex and masturbation were considered sins. The only message he could ever remember hearing was that it would ruin his life and condemn him to hell.
Though he’d drifted from evangelicalism, sexual shame still clung to him. Around his birthday, he decided to experiment and bought a male sex toy. But after unwrapping the bulky plastic object and fumbling with it, he felt nothing.
“I felt so embarrassed and stupid,” he said. “I’m 40 and I don’t even know how to use this thing.”
Frustrated, he vented in a Facebook group for ex-evangelicals, ranting about how he’d never learned even the basics of sex. It struck a chord. With 30,000 members, the group regularly discusses sexuality and relationships. Members trade stories, comfort each other, and share resources – books, therapists, anything that might help.
One commenter recommended a private group: the Purity Culture Dropout Program, run by sex educator Erica Smith. It offers sex-ed lessons and a safe space for people to unpack fear, compare upbringings, and confront the shame they’ve internalized.
Matt enthusiastically signed up.
Purity culture – the conservative Christian belief in abstaining from sex until marriage – boomed in the 1990s and early 2000s, just as Matt was a teen.
In 1993, the Southern Baptist Convention launched its “true love waits” program, which encouraged teens to take “pledges” promising to save themselves for marriage. Books such as I Kissed Dating Goodbye (1997), gave teens strict instructions not to date for fun. Purity balls popped up, where girls attended with their fathers, who vowed to “protect” their daughters’ virginity.
By the 2000s, purity culture was mainstream. The Jonas brothers wore true love waits “purity rings.” But it wasn’t just a church thing – its leaders pushed it as a national issue.
In 1994, “true love waits” gathered thousands of teens in Washington, carpeting the National Mall with 200,000 pink, yellow, and blue pledge cards. Two years later, Bill Clinton signed a bill funding abstinence-only sex ed at $50m a year. The Bush administration expanded it, despite mounting evidence that abstinence-only education didn’t reduce teen sexual activity.
Purity culture enforced rigid gender roles: men were cast as aggressors; girls were told not to tempt them. Both ended up alienated from their bodies and desires.
But rarely do we hear about heterosexual men raised in this ideology. Purity culture “tells men they’re supposed to lead”, says former minister and religion scholar Bradley Onishi, co-host of the podcast Straight White American Jesus. “It says God made you aggressive, an uncontrollable sexual beast.”
“If men don’t heal from purity culture, they’ll keep hurting themselves and others,” he adds. “They won’t form healthy relationships – romantic, familial, professional, or political.”
Joshua Harris, author of I Kissed Dating Goodbye, has since apologized for the fear he instilled and the false promise that his method would lead to a happy ending.
Too little, too late, perhaps. Today, 17 US states still offer abstinence-only sex ed – and they have higher-than-average teen pregnancy rates.
Matt was born in 1982 in Pennsylvania. His father was heavily involved with the Independent Fundamentalist Baptist church, a deeply conservative denomination that believes men have divine authority over women and children. Weekends meant choir practice and pledging allegiance to the American flag near the pulpit.
As a child, Matt was quiet and empathetic. He couldn’t play sports due to a heart condition and instead enjoyed music and art – activities his community considered feminine. “I got the message early that there was something inappropriate about that,” he said. “The message was men should be strong and tough.”
Formal sex education was off-limits in his house. However, like many children, he discovered masturbation around the age of nine or 10 – even though he did not understand what it was. “Sometimes I had trouble falling asleep, and I realised that touching myself was soothing,” he said.
At 11, his father caught him in the act and dragged him to the dining room, where his mother was helping Matt’s younger brother with homework. “He was yelling at me, screaming ‘Are you sexually active?’” Matt remembered. “I felt so humiliated, I just wanted to melt into a puddle on the floor.”
Weeks later, his Sunday school teacher told the class Magic Johnson’s HIV diagnosis was God’s punishment for sexual sin.
“I immediately started panicking,” Matt said. “I figured I must have made some kind of sexual sin, and that was why my dad had been so angry. So I thought I must have made God just as angry.”
He soon found himself in a repetitive loop, promising God not to masturbate again, then breaking his promise and praying for forgiveness.
“I think I eventually figured out you can’t catch HIV from masturbating,” he recalled dryly. “But by then, I was receiving all kinds of other purity culture messages.”
As he moved through his teens, the purity industry was booming. Matt’s youth pastors read passages from I Kissed Dating Goodbye and explained that sexual contact would ruin their future marriages. They compared pre-marital sex to a piece of gum: the more times it’s chewed, the less appealing it is.
“The idea of sexual sin terrified me,” Matt remembered. Whenever he came across pornography or sex scenes in movies, they didn’t make him feel aroused: “Which made me feel smug, like I was more godly than other boys.”
According to his church’s teachings, this godly behavior would be rewarded with a perfect relationship, and Matt still craved a romantic connection. But he wasn’t sure how to turn any of his friendships with girls into something deeper.
“From what I was taught, it seemed you were friends with someone and at some point it would just happen,” he said. “But I didn’t know how to make it happen.”
The Purity Culture Dropout Program costs $50 a month. It offers two live lessons per month, a lesson archive, and a private discussion space.
The first session Matt joined, in 2024, tackled the myth of porn addiction. Most experts don’t consider it physically addictive, though it can become compulsive. Matt shared that youth leaders had told him porn would destroy his life.
“The responses were so open and accepting – it felt safe,” he said.
Smith, the course founder, wasn’t raised in purity culture but has seen its wreckage firsthand. She has an MA in Education from Widener University’s Center for Human Sexuality Studies and previously taught sex ed to young women and LGBTQ youth in Philadelphia’s juvenile justice system.
She’s watched the post-2016 wave of religious “deconstruction” accelerate during Covid. “People were leaving churches and saying, ‘I need sex ed. I need someone to talk to,’” she said.
When she launched the program in 2019, most clients were women. Now, more men are signing up – often nudged by partners or female friends.
She sees two main groups: men who rushed into marriage to have sex, only to end up in dysfunctional relationships; and men like Matt, who arrive at adulthood with no sexual experience at all.
“So many struggle with sexual thoughts, body image, and basic confidence,” Smith said. “And when it comes to dating, they don’t know where to begin.”
Sex therapist Jeremiah Gibson often quips that “you don’t need to have grown up in the church to be fucked over by the church”. Along with his partner Julia Postema, he specialises in working with couples who’ve left high-control religions. The pair also host a podcast, Sexvangelicals, with the tagline: “The sex education the church didn’t want you to have.”
Both were raised in fundamentalist traditions and married – then subsequently divorced – while young. They partly blame purity culture for those relationship breakdowns; none of them had the emotional tools to discuss the crucial components of a life lived together.
“Communicating your sexual needs and desires is one of the most vulnerable things you can do,” Gibson said. “One of the theories in sex therapy is that if couples can solve problems around sexuality, then they can solve problems around anything.”
“Purity culture can really dehumanize both men and women,” added Postema. She says the men she works with are often stuck in a “double-bind” of being told God made them insatiable sexual creatures, but that they must also constantly fight this God-given nature.
Gibson believes that comprehensive sex education would not just help couples have healthier sex lives, but would go some way to reducing wider divisions in society.
“If it were a part of our curriculum, I think that we would have better ways of resolving differences,” Gibson said. “We wouldn’t be excoriating people who have different values to us. We’d see an increase in both men’s and women’s ability to communicate clearly and concisely.”
Nathanial, or “Nate”, now 37, grew up attending a non-denominational evangelical megachurch in upstate New York. Religion trickled down to every aspect of family life.
In his early teens he joined a church-based men’s “accountability group”. These sprung up around the country during the 1990s, with the most famous being Focus on the Family’s Promise Keepers. Youth leaders encouraged the boys to confess every time they “stumbled” by looking at porn or masturbating. Nate and his peers shared tactics on how to resist sin, such as snapping an elastic band around their wrist when they had “impure thoughts”.
“What that does – or at least, what it did in my mind – is that all women are viewed as potential wives,” he said. “It frames women as not people, but as plot devices in your life.”
Nate met his first girlfriend at church when he was 16 and asked her out by telling her he could see them getting married one day. The pair were determined to keep their relationship as Godly as possible. The one time the couple went slightly further than kissing, “she was so upset she didn’t speak to me for a whole week”.
He met his now-wife, Katy, on a study abroad program in France and got married at 23. Though they were beginning to question evangelical teachings, they still waited until their wedding to have sex – partly because Katy, who’d never received sex education, was terrified of getting pregnant.
But their combined lack of experience placed a strain on the relationship. Katy had been taught in church to submit to her husband, that she should never refuse him sex, and that men needed to have sex daily. When Nate would sometimes rather – in his words – “eat ice cream and watch TV”, she’d feel upset and rejected.
“There were times where it was uncomfortable, because we had certain expectations of what the opposite sex wanted,” said Katy. “And when that wasn’t the case, it felt very confusing.”
Therapists working with couples in similar situations often witness relationships break down entirely. But over time, Nate and Katy learned to discuss what they were experiencing. These conversations led them to completely pick apart purity culture, and they eventually left evangelical Christianity in favour of the liberal ELCA church.
“In a weird way, [purity culture] helped us communicate – we didn’t have previous partners to figure things out with, so we had to figure them out together,” Katy said.
Hearing about women’s experiences in evangelical culture has played a big role in helping Nate question the ideas around gender he grew up with. “For us boys, the teachings were always very internal, policing our thoughts and feelings,” he said. Katy, on the other hand, was taught from an early age to not tempt men to stray, to always dress modestly and never do anything that could be misconstrued as flirting: “It sounds like so much pressure, having to monitor your surroundings.”
The experience has shaped how the couple are raising their six-year-old daughter and ten-year-old son. “I want my daughter to have full information about her body – I don’t want her to go through what I did,” said Katy. As for their son, “I just want him to understand that women are people,” said Nate.
Today, most of the purity balls and rings are gone, only to be replaced by Christian influencers. “I see this new generation of TikTok and Instagram influencers talking about how wonderful it is to follow God and wait until marriage for sex,” says Smith. She also sees purity messaging being absorbed into new-age spirituality, with ideas about the “divine masculine or feminine” mirroring the same rigid gender roles.
As he made his way through the Purity Culture Dropout Program, Matt began sifting through childhood memories. “I see so much that triggered shame, and that probably made me the way that I am,” he said.
As someone who doesn’t feel much arousal from typical erotic material, the course has helped him realise he may fall somewhere on the asexuality spectrum. “But the question I still have is: Was I always that way? Or is it because of purity culture?” he said. “I think it really installed a fear of anything sexual in me.”
Matt still longs for a romantic connection, but the idea of embarking on one remains daunting. “Not having any of that practice that most people have had, and having this trauma, it all makes me a bit nervous at the idea of going into relationships,” he said. “I don’t know if that will ever change.”
Federal police have formally accused Brazil’s former far-right president, Jair Bolsonaro, of presiding over an illegal spying network which allegedly snooped on political rivals, journalists and environmentalists during his administration.
Bolsonaro is already facing the prospect of jail time over his alleged role in masterminding a military coup plot designed to help him keep power after losing the 2022 election to the leftwing veteran Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva. There is broad consensus among analysts that Bolsonaro’s conviction is a foregone conclusion and the 70-year-old populist is expected to face arrest in the coming months once a supreme court trial concludes.
The latest accusations relate to a two-year federal police investigation into suspicions that a “parallel” intelligence agency was set up during Bolsonaro’s 2019-23 administration in order to monitor those considered government foes.
On Tuesday, police accused Bolsonaro’s alleged former spy chief, Alexandre Ramagem – who ran Brazil’s intelligence agency, Abin, from 2019 to 2022 – of running the clandestine operation and accused more than 30 others of being involved, including the president’s politician son Carlos Bolsonaro.
The news website G1 said investigators had concluded that under Bolsonaro members of Abin “formed a criminal organization in order to monitor people and public authorities, invading mobile phones and computers”.
Some of the information gathered was allegedly provided to a covert social media team that operated within the presidential palace and allegedly used illegally collected information as ammunition to launch online attacks.
The targets reportedly included four supreme court ministers and powerful politicians including the former president of Brazil’s lower house, Arthur Lira, and the then governor of São Paulo, João Doria, a prominent rightwing rival to the president.
Journalists and public servants were also reportedly spied on, including Hugo Loss, a respected member of the environmental agency, Ibama, who was on the front line of efforts to protect the Amazon at a time when illegal loggers and miners were emboldened by Bolsonaro’s anti-environment rhetoric and climate denial.
Loss had worked closely with Bruno Pereira, the Indigenous expert and former government employee who was murdered in the rainforest region three years ago this month with the British journalist Dom Phillips.
The newspaper O Globo said police believed the Bolsonarista spy network was created in order “to make it possible for Bolsonaro to remain in the presidential chair”.
Bolsonaro and Ramagem made no immediate comment on the accusations but have previously denied such charges. Carlos Bolsonaro responded to the allegations on X, suggesting that they were the result of a political grudge against his father’s political movement. “Was anyone in any doubt that Lula’s PF [federal police] would do this to me?” he tweeted.
During his three presidential campaigns, Donald Trump ran as an opponent of serial military interventions and wars of “regime change” à la Iraq and Libya, which neoconservatives and liberal internationalists alike had embraced after the end of the cold war. He correctly sensed that many Americans had tired of “forever wars”.
Benjamin Netanyahu’s attack on Iran is a watershed moment for Trump. It will force him to reveal whether he truly represents a clean break with the foreign policy establishment, often referred to as “the blob”, or is in fact a continuation of it. It all depends on whether he decides to join Israel’s attacks on Iran.
Trump faces a tough choice. Israel has strong, longstanding, deep and variegated support in the US, and Netanyahu may seek substantial American military engagement, even military intervention. He’s already begun setting the stage. In a flattery-filled birthday missive, he gushed that Trump has “done great things for Israel” and that “we’re dealing with something that will threaten all of us sooner or later. Our victory will be your victory”.
Netanyahu bombed Iran when Washington and Tehran were still negotiating the future of its nuclear enrichment program, and reportedly despite hearing from the US that an attack could jeopardise the talks. Netanyahu opposed any agreement because of two firmly held beliefs. First: a nuclear-armed Iran can be prevented only by destroying its entire enrichment infrastructure. Second: Iran’s threat to Israel isn’t limited to nuclear weapons; the Islamic Republic’s ideology rejects the very existence of a Jewish state in historic Palestine. These two convictions explain why Netanyahu has not only targeted Iran’s nuclear installations but also urged Iranians to overthrow their government.
Trump must decide whether he wants to join a war guided by these two goals. If he jumps in, he’ll reveal himself to be no different from the blob; if he doesn’t, he risks running afoul of Israel’s most fervent American allies – not just Jewish organisations, but also voting blocs such as evangelical Christians. There has been much debate about whether Netanyahu sandbagged Trump, or whether Trump greenlighted the war from the outset because, despite his self-presentation as a foreign policy maverick, he, like Joe Biden – whom he loves to malign – is in fact an unalloyed supporter of Israel.
Regardless of which theory is accurate, Trump confronts a hard decision. He can either back Netanyahu’s war or tell him that having started it unilaterally, he’s on his own. Trump could try to split the difference by limiting himself to what he is already doing: helping to intercept Israel-bound Iranian drones and missiles, while steering clear of a military clash with Iran.
Yet if Iran’s missile barrages intensify and Israel experiences far more death and destruction than it has so far, that gambit could fail. Trump will face intense pressure to enter the fray to defend Israel. But prominent members of the Maga movement’s isolationist-oriented wing will oppose a war with Iran. One of them, Tucker Carlson, has already accused the president of being “complicit” in Israel’s war on Iran and betraying his “America first” foreign policy pledge, and his sentiments have wider purchase.
Netanyahu has put Trump in a bind – unnecessarily. Iran did not attack Israel. Nor was it preparing to, which means that Netanyahu’s attack was not a pre-emptive one necessitated by the imperative of beating an adversary to the punch. Both variants of self-defence-based war have a basis in international law and military ethics. Netanyahu’s war doesn’t belong to either genre. It is a preventive war comparable to George W Bush’s attack on Iraq and Putin’s invasion of Ukraine. Both were justified by invoking a hypothetical threat; neither was necessitated by a clear and present danger.
Netanyahu has been warning about a nuclear-equipped Iran since 1992, when he predicted that Tehran would build the bomb in three to five years. If an Iran with nuclear weapons is Netanyahu’s nightmare, he should have applauded, not lambasted, the joint comprehensive plan of action (JCPOA) that the Obama administration and Iran signed in 2015. Once Trump was elected, Netanyahu convinced him to defenestrate that deal. The JCPOA’s provisions – some extended to 13 years, others to 15 – eliminated 98% of Iran’s enriched uranium stocks, capped uranium enrichment at 3.67%, dismantled about two-thirds of its centrifuges, placed stringent limits on heavy water production, and incorporated extensive verification measures.
Netanyahu launched the war to scuttle the US-Iran talks and, if possible, bring down the Islamic Republic. Iraq 2003 and Ukraine 2022 prove that “preventive” wars should never be legitimised; they allow leaders excessive, needless and dangerous leeway. Trump therefore has strong grounds to oppose Israel’s attack on Iran. At a press conference at the G7 summit in Canada, he refused to comment when asked whether he would join Israel, but noted that “the United States has always supported Israel”, that Iran wasn’t winning, that Israel “was doing very well”, and that Iran brought the war on itself by spurning his 60-day deadline to sign an agreement and now wanted to talk.
Trump reportedly resisted putting his name to a draft statement calling for de-escalation, produced by the other G7 members, before eventually signing. On the other hand, after Netanyahu said he hadn’t ruled out killing Iran’s supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, several news outlets, citing American officials, reported that Trump “vetoed” that step, no doubt realising that it could make the confrontation careen out of control.
Even assuming that Trump didn’t want Israel to attack when it did, he has manoeuvred to turn events to his advantage, suggesting that the war will compel Iran to sign a deal on his terms. The president’s problem is that this war could continue for days, even weeks. And the longer it lasts, the harder it will be to finesse direct questions with ambiguous replies and to avoid hard decisions, especially if Israel needs direct US help. At some point, Israel’s American supporters and the anti-intervention camp within the US may each ask: “Will the real Donald Trump please stand up?”
Rajan Menon is a professor emeritus of international relations at the City College of New York and a senior research scholar at Columbia University’s Saltzman Institute of War and Peace Studies
Fatal clashes between police and supporters of former president Evo Morales have deepened Bolivia’s political and economic crisis, heightening tensions in the Andean country just two months before the presidential election.
Six people have been killed and more than 300 injured in weeks of unrest. The dead include four police officers, one of whom was reportedly killed by dynamite which had been strapped to his body.
Demonstrators have blockaded roads across the country since 2 June in response to rulings by the constitutional and electoral courts that barred Morales, 65, from seeking a fourth term in the 17 August election.
On Sunday the protesters announced a “humanitarian pause” at the blockades, but some remained in place, prolonging a two-week-long disruption in delivering food, medicine, and fuel.
In response to the protests he called, Morales has himself become the target of a new “terrorism” investigation, announced by the government of current president Luis Arce, 61 – who served as finance minister under the former president and is now his main rival.
Morales has been entrenched since October in the coca-growing region of Chapare, where hundreds of coca farmers are preventing police and military forces from executing an arrest warrant over allegations that Morales fathered a child with a 15-year-old girl during his presidency in 2016.
“Democracy in our country is at risk,” said President Arce following the killing of the four police officers.
Three officers were shot dead by protesters last Wednesday in the mining town of Llallagua, where a 17-year-old student also died, reportedly beaten to death by protesters who accused him of being a police informant.
The fourth officer was in a village in the Cochabamba department when, according to the government, he was “kidnapped by a mob” and killed with dynamite strapped to his chest. In the same village, a civilian was shot dead by what the government claims was gunfire from protesters.
“[The officers] were Bolivians who gave their lives at a time when the country is under siege, facing the risk that elections might not be able to take place,” said Arce.
The UN human rights office has called for an “impartial and thorough” investigation into the deaths.
Morales, who had defended “mobilisation and blockades” as “legitimate expressions of resistance,” later said he is an “enemy of protests” and claimed that “what happened in Llallagua was well staged” to incriminate his supporters.
“It’s crazy for him to say that, because he is the ‘father’ of the blockades: he built his entire political career blocking roads,” said economic analyst Gonzalo Chávez Alvarez, a professor at the Universidad Católica Boliviana.
Morales is barred from running by a constitutional court ruling that reaffirmed the constitution’s two-term presidential limit and by the electoral court, which argued that his party is not officially registered.
Bolivia’s longest-serving leader governed from 2006 to 2019. After about a decade of prosperity driven by a natural gas boom, reserves had dwindled, and an economic crisis began.
In 2019, he sought a fourth term; there was a blackout during the vote count, and when it resumed, it showed him as the winner. The country erupted in violent protests, and Morales fled to Mexico and later to Argentina.
After his protégé Arce won the presidency in 2020, Morales returned, but the two soon fell out.
Under Arce, the economy has deteriorated, and the country is now facing its worst economic crisis since the hyperinflation of 1985, with inflation and a shortage of US dollars and fuel.
Deeply unpopular, the president reversed his decision to seek re-election and now backs his former interior minister, 36-year-old lawyer Eduardo del Castillo.
Even within the left, he will face competition from the equally young senate president, 36-year-old Andrónico Rodríguez, once seen as Morales’s natural heir due to his Indigenous roots and leadership in the coca growers’ union, but now treated as a traitor by the former president.
On the right, businessman Samuel Doria Medina, 66, and former president Jorge “Tuto” Quiroga, 65, are polling well, and will try to oust the Movimiento al Socialismo (Mas) party after nearly two decades in power.
Meanwhile, police and military forces have so far failed to execute the arrest warrant against Morales over the allegation of statutory rape.
Last week, all other presidential candidates except him met in the capital, La Paz. At the end of the meeting, the head of the electoral court, Óscar Hassenteufel, pledged that elections would go ahead “without fail” on 17 August.
“Morales wants to enter the elections at all costs, and he won’t succeed,” said economist Alvarez. “So there’s uncertainty over whether the elections will really happen because it’s hard to say whether Morales will have enough strength to stop them.”
A memorial outside the Minnesota house chambers displays a photo of Melissa and Mark Hortman behind a table where people are dropping off flowers, notes, a hard hat, a plaid shirt. Signs in front of it read “in honor of our beloved Melissa”. On her desk, a photo and a bouquet of roses.
On Monday afternoon, the skies darkened, spilling sheets of rain across the Minneapolis suburbs Melissa Hortman represented.
The suspected gunman behind the killings of the Hortmans was captured on Saturday night, but the scars of the crimes will linger much longer. Residents here feel a sense of relief that Vance Boelter was taken into custody, but it comes alongside intense grief, a craving for justice and a sense of resolve.
Boelter was arrested and faces a host of charges over the killings of Melissa and Mark Hortman and the shootings of John and Yvette Hoffman in the suburbs of Minneapolis in the early hours of Saturday. Boelter allegedly dressed as a police officer and drove in a car that resembled a police squad, then fled the Hortmans’ home, leaving behind a list of names, mostly Democratic elected officials and abortion rights activists, menacing the people who he allegedly wanted dead.
The Hoffmans released a statement after the arrest, expressing “deep and profound gratitude” to police and the public for working to find and arrest the man. They said they were “incredibly lucky to be alive” and that “there is never a place for senseless political violence and loss of life”.
Brooklyn Park mayor Hollies Winston said Hortman built a “huge legacy” in his community, as did her husband, Mark. Her fingerprints are all over the city and the state, in the visible legislative accomplishments, but also the quiet ways she helped.
She worked with a youth mentor program in the area, bringing kids into her home to teach them about politics, he said. “She contributed greatly to that without really taking any credit for it,” Winston said.
“When you talk about amazing people, the community is really grieving that loss,” he said. “And I think now we’re kind of pivoting to, how do we honor that legacy, and how do we heal from what has occurred?”
Parts of Brooklyn Park were on a shelter-in-place warning on Saturday, contributing to the sense of unease, though Winston said he believes the community trusted law enforcement and understood the need for caution.
There was a “huge sense of relief” at the suspect’s capture, to at least put that piece of the process behind them, he said. People also want information about the investigation and to understand what happened, he said. “People very much want justice,” he said.
Many of those believed to be included on the gunman’s hit list expressed their thanks to law enforcement for finding the suspect. Elected officials quickly got law enforcement protection in the hours after the shooting – some said they learned about the shootings because law enforcement reached out to them about their inclusion on the list. Authorities say a motive isn’t clear, but allege he had been planning and monitoring lawmakers for months.
State representative Huldah Momanyi-Hiltsley, who represented the same area as Hortman, told CNN that people are still in shock, though she called the arrest good news that provided a sense of relief. Still, she said, “we are definitely on our toes and still looking behind our backs”.
She said that the shooting was “yet another reminder” of the increasing safety threats against elected officials. “This is just a wake-up call,” Momanyi-Hiltsley said.
Steve Simon, the Democratic secretary of state, said law enforcement was “absolutely and immediately attentive”, providing police protection to him and many other elected officials. It’s believed the gunman acted alone, but there’s the lingering danger “in the back of everyone’s mind of whether or not there could be a copycat out there”, he told the Guardian.
Simon has known Hortman for three decades, since they went to law school together. He lost a friend, and he is still in shock. “The idea that we could still accomplish the things that she cared about in her name, we can still do great things in her name that she would be proud of, that is a potential source of strength,” he said.
Keith Ellison, the state attorney general, said in a statement that “all Minnesotans are relieved” that the suspect was in custody, but that he continued to grieve. “We will never be the same without them,” he said of the Hortmans.
It was, for many, a sign of the degraded state of American politics, now rife with acts of violence. Governor Tim Walz didn’t hesitate to call the shootings “politically motivated assassinations” – and the conditions that led to them aren’t resolved with one man’s arrest.
“As a country we cannot become numb to this violence,” Walz said. “We are a deeply divided nation. That has become even more clear over the last two days … As we heal, we will not let fear win. We must now move forward in Melissa’s honor with understanding, service and, above all, a sense of one another’s humanity.”
In an announcement of federal charges on Monday, acting United States attorney Joe Thompson said: “These were targeted political assassinations the likes of which have never been seen in Minnesota. It was an attack on our state and on our democracy. We will not rest until he is brought to justice.”
Like many other elections officials, Simon has been on the receiving end of threats for years. His office was evacuated last fall after receiving a package of suspicious white powder from something called the “Traitor Elimination Army”, he said. He feels he has enough security and protection, but that work needs to be done to address the uptick in political violence.
“We have to resist the temptation to engage in scorekeeping when it comes to violent, politically inspired acts,” he said. “I think it’s up to every sort of political community to police its own, to make sure that rhetoric and action don’t get out of hand and have the unintentional effect, much less the intentional effect, of inspiring violence.”
Angie Craig, a Democratic member of Congress from Minnesota, told the Star Tribune she had already increased security before the shootings, a sign of the times. “Unfortunately, we’ve seen a rise in political threats of violence for some time now,” she told the paper. “I don’t do public events anymore without private security or police presence in my own district.”
Some are still grappling with what could have happened to them. Ann Rest, a Democratic lawmaker who represents the city of New Hope, found out that the shooter had been outside her home on Saturday morning. The city’s police had come to proactively check on her and saw what they now believe was the suspect’s vehicle outside, thinking it was another member of law enforcement, authorities said Monday.
Rest credited the New Hope police for their “heroic work”. “Their quick action saved my life,” she said in a statement. “I am also thankful for the work of state and local law enforcement to apprehend the suspect before he could take any more lives.”
A lobbyist at the Minnesota statehouse said the capitol community was sending messages to each other to check in, to make sure people were safe but also to see how they were dealing with the horror.
“It is sort of cold comfort,” the lobbyist said of the arrest. “It can’t undo what’s happened. It’s such a rubicon to have been crossed.”
Because the suspect was on the run and allegedly knew about planned protests against the Trump administration, the governor and state patrol warned people not to attend mass protests in the state on Saturday – though many thousands of people did anyway, showing they would not shrink in the face of political violence.
Michelle Hensley, a Minneapolis activist, said friends sent her the message that people should stay home. She said: “My immediate reaction was literally, fuck that. It’s exactly the wrong response to this. This is what they want. And so it was so heartening to see so many other Minnesotans refused to cower.”
Diane Brady-Leighton served as a marshal for the No Kings rally at the state capitol. She felt that she couldn’t control for her own safety anyway, so she went ahead with her plans.
She felt “heartbroken and devastated and determined” to continue engaging in activist work to “get back to a functioning democracy”. She made a call to her husband, leaving an “if I die” message, because there was, after all, a killer on the loose. “I just feel like, my kids are adults. I have had a very full life. And this is mine to do in this moment.”
Missiles follow trajectories. So do countries. And over the past few days, Israel’s attacks have dramatically changed Iran’s trajectory.
Some believe that Iran was already on a downward spiral and that Israel’s actions will simply accelerate the descent. In an op-ed published on Monday, several of Iran’s most prominent civil society figures, including Nobel peace prize laureate Narges Mohammadi, declared that the “only credible path to safeguard [Iran] and its people is the resignation of the current leadership”. In this view, the war could be construed as a deliverance – Israeli officials are openly suggesting that their operations could lead to regime change in Iran. But if Iran’s decline was already precipitous, why are ordinary Iranians terrified by the outbreak of war? Why have they not welcomed Benjamin Netanyahu as the saviour he imagines himself to be?
The answer is that Israel is harming, not improving Iran’s trajectory, the arc of which had recently been bent upwards through the persistent efforts of the Iranian people. Iran has long undershot its potential, held back by a sclerotic and oppressive government that has failed to undertake necessary reforms. Yet despite many headwinds, the country has been experiencing slow but steady improvements in its political, economic and social conditions over the past few years. Iran’s people have been successfully pushing back against the authoritarian tendencies of the leaders in Tehran. Now they have been thrust into a war devised by an authoritarian leader in Jerusalem.
When the hardliner president Ebrahim Raisi died in a helicopter crash a little over a year ago, Iran’s political establishment reconsidered whether the authoritarian consolidation that had taken place during his term had been worthwhile. Manipulation of elections and brutal suppression of protests had left Iran’s ruling elite distrusted and unpopular. Iran’s current president, Masoud Pezeshkian, was elected to repair Iran’s social contract. His first speech as president included an important admission. “We make promises, and we fail to fulfil them,” he said, acknowledging the degraded legitimacy of the Islamic Republic. Less than a year into his tenure, and until the fateful events of the last few days, Pezeshkian had made some modest progress in trying to regain the trust of the electorate.
Iran’s leaders have had to acknowledge the power and perseverance of Iranian women, who mobilised during the Women, Life, Freedom movement in 2022 and never looked back. When the Iranian parliament passed a draconian mandatory veiling law late last year, Pezeshkian described it as an “unjust law”, a confession that the Islamic Republic will itself remain unjust so long as it fails to protect the rights of women. No longer a fringe issue, women’s rights are now at the forefront of the fight for political renewal in Iran.
Pezeshkian had also presided over a modest economic recovery, though he does not deserve credit for it. Despite the pressure of US sanctions, Iran’s economy had returned to growth, owing to the resourcefulness of the managerial class and resilience of the workforce. But in recent months, inflation rebounded, and the country was rocked by major protests over controversial fuel subsidy reforms, underscoring the need for better management of the economy. On Monday, Iran’s parliament confirmed Seyed Ali Madanizadeh, a young economist trained at Stanford University and the University of Chicago, would become economy minister. In an interview last week, Madanizadeh stated that economic reforms “are not something that can happen without bringing people on board and opening up a dialogue with the public”.
But it is in the space of foreign policy that Iran’s course has altered most dramatically. Six years of intensive dialogue with regional neighbours, especially the UAE and Saudi Arabia, has led to renewed ties. In just the last few months, Tehran hosted the emir of Qatar, the diplomatic adviser to the president of the UAE, and the defence minister of Saudi Arabia. The new regional policy was summed up by the Iranian foreign minister, Abbas Araghchi, when he stated: “Our neighbours are our priority.”
Even Iran’s relationships with its proxies have changed. Iran moderated its support for the Houthis as part of a deal reached with Saudi Arabia in March 2023. More recently, the fall of Bashar al-Assad and Israel’s hobbling of Hamas and Hezbollah were strategic setbacks for Iran. But these events also gave rise to a robust debate among Iran’s national security leaders about whether the “forward defence” strategy, rather than making Iran more secure, had given rise to anti-Iranian sentiment across the region, while still leaving Iran vulnerable to attack.
Finally, and most consequentially, Iran was negotiating a nuclear deal with the US. The seriousness of these negotiations should be underlined. President Donald Trump tore up the nuclear deal in 2018 at a time when Iran was in full compliance with its commitments. He reimposed sanctions, pushed Iran’s economy back into steep recession, and brought the region to the brink of war by assassinating Gen Qassem Suleimani in January 2020.
Not long after Trump was inaugurated for his second term, Iran’s supreme leader, Ali Khamenei, called negotiations with the United States “unwise”. But senior officials, including Pezeshkian, Araghchi and parliament speaker Mohammad Bagher Ghalibaf, pushed back. They may have done so because of personal convictions, but they probably recognised that the Iranian people are tired of enmity with the US, which has left Iran isolated and embattled.
The first round of negotiations took place on 12 April. Four subsequent rounds were conducted in just two months – the progress was evident enough that even Israeli officials were briefing journalists that a deal between Iran and the US was “likely”. A sixth round of negotiations was slated to take place on Sunday in Oman. Those talks were cancelled after Israel’s attacks, which Trump cheered.
The Iranian people have struggled for over a century against forces of authoritarianism, which can seem endemic in the Middle East. At numerous junctures, foreign intervention has undermined their efforts. In 1911, a constitutional revolution was crushed with the intervention of Russian troops. In 1953, Iran’s elected government was ousted in a coup engineered by the CIA and MI6. In 1980, the course of the Islamic Revolution was altered when Saddam Hussein invaded Iran. In 2018, Trump withdrew from the nuclear deal, dooming Iran’s once influential and popular reformist movement, which had staked so much on the promise of sanctions relief.
With each of these setbacks, ordinary Iranians persisted. Until a few days ago, something was shifting in Iran. Tentatively but noticeably, the country was moving in a better direction, pushed and pulled by 90 million souls yearning for greater security, prosperity and liberty.
Seen in this context, Israel’s attacks demonstrate a contempt not just for life – the civilian death toll in Iran is mounting – but also a contempt for the agency and aspirations of the Iranian people. They did not want this war and they were pushing their leaders to avoid it, but Israel chose to attack to prevent a new nuclear agreement between the US and Iran.
The Iranian people are no longer in control of their futures, and they find themselves watching the trajectories of ballistic missiles, wondering what could have been.
 Esfandyar Batmanghelidj is the founder of the Bourse & Bazaar Foundation thinktank
In the world of the Ecuadorian Amazon, humans, plants and animals are relatives, and ancient stories reflect real ecological relationships and Indigenous knowledge rooted in profound connections to the land. But one of those connections – ceremonial medicine known as hayakwaska – is now marketed as a mystical shortcut to healing and enlightenment. Behind the scenes of these “healing retreats” lies a deeper story of cultural erasure, linguistic distortion and ongoing colonisation masked as wellness.
The global popularity of “ayahuasca” has given rise to a new form of spiritual tourism that romanticises and distorts Indigenous cultures. This growing industry fuels the exoticisation of Indigenous peoples, turning our languages, practices and identities into consumable fantasies for outsiders. Sacred rituals are stripped of context, spiritual roles are commercialised, and even the names of the plants are misused, reducing complex cultural systems into simplified, marketable experiences.
Aya means the soul of a dead person, skeleton, or corpse. The term ayahuasca is a modern invention, largely used in spiritual tourism. In our language, we say “hayakata upina” when referring to drinking hayakwaska. Hayak is a short form of hayakwaska and directly means bitter, so the translation means drinking the “bitter vine”. In contrast, “ayata upina” would mean “to drink the soul of a dead person”, which no one would say. For this reason, I will use the correct term: hayakwaska.
Even the name of the medicine has been distorted. To understand it properly, one must understand our society, its structure, language and deep ties to the land. Unlike English or Spanish, Indigenous languages such as our Runashimi (Kichwa) are rooted in place. Like modern science, our knowledge is based on observation, but through relationships. We live through a social-emotional relationship with the land. In the rainforest, all beings, including humans and the more-than-human world, have roles and responsibilities.
Although our yachaks (traditional healers) may treat individuals, their true role is to maintain balance within the community and among relationships between people, forests and all beings. Healing, in our worldview, is collective because we are all interconnected. When yachaks focus only on “ayahuasca” tourism for profit, abandoning this sacred responsibility, we must ask: what have they become? Tourist-oriented healing centres often prioritise individual experiences, personal growth, ego work and private revelations, detached from community, land and reciprocity. When healing is stripped of its collective foundation, it no longer nourishes true awakening. Instead, it risks becoming a performance that elevates the self, not the whole, opposing the very essence of Indigenous healing, which is rooted in relationship, humility and shared wellbeing.
It is not just sad, it is dangerous. When spiritual practices are altered to please outsiders, it shifts the very meaning of hayak and the relationship we have with it. These changes reshape how younger generations understand our traditions, not through lived experience or guidance from elders, but through performances tailored for tourism. What was once sacred, genuine and real becomes scripted. The danger lies not only in losing the essence of our ceremonies but in distorting our collective memory, values and roles. When healing becomes entertainment, and culture becomes spectacle, the spiritual thread that holds our community together begins to fray.
Hayakwaska tourism is also a driver of illegal hunting practices. Traditional hunting is rooted in respect and reciprocity, but today commercial demand for animal parts threatens both species and Indigenous ways of life, and this growing tourism industry not only distorts culture but also fuels threats to biodiversity. Recent research highlights how jaguars, already a near threatened species, are being exploited to meet tourist demand. Items such as jaguar-tooth pendants and skin bracelets are sold as mystical enhancers of the ayahuasca experience, endangering both wildlife and sacred balance.
Using Indigenous knowledge and medicine carries deep social and environmental responsibility. Without that responsibility, it becomes nothing more than extractivism, another form of colonialism dressed in spiritual language. The real question is: How are “ayahuasca tourists” giving back? Are they supporting Indigenous rights, protecting ancestral lands, and standing with the people who safeguard this wisdom, often at great personal risk? Too many seek healing from Indigenous medicines while ignoring the lived realities of those who protect the plants, the knowledge, and the territories they come from. These communities continue their struggle amid threats from mining, oil extraction and agribusiness. If there is to be any true healing, it must include justice, reciprocity and solidarity with the people and the land from which this medicine grows.
Inspired by their stories and our experiences, I, Nina, created Waska: The Forest is My Family. The film explores the exploitation of Indigenous peoples and the forest. As the granddaughter of a yachak, I wanted to share what it means to live connected to hayakwaska and the land.
Nina Gualinga and Eli Virkina are both Indigenous women of the Ecuadorian Amazon, storytellers and land defenders
Do you have an opinion on the issues raised in this article? If you would like to submit a response of up to 300 words by email to be considered for publication in our letters section, please click here.
In an interview with Fox News on Sunday, Benjamin Netanyahu, Israel’s prime minister, pontificated on a theme he has become increasingly attached to in recent years: that Israel under his leadership would not simply attempt to dismantle Iran’s nuclear and ballistic missile programmes through military attack, but in the process usher in regime change in Tehran.
The government in Tehran, he said, was “very weak”, adding that given the opportunity, “80% of the people would throw these theological thugs out”.
The list of targets in Iran hit in the last two days appear to confirm that Israel may be pursuing a broader agenda than simply destroying Tehran’s nuclear programme – striking police headquarters, the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps intelligence directorate, and the state television broadcaster while it was live on air.
For all that he views himself as an expert on its internal politics, Netanyahu has never visited Iran. His knowledge of the country is filtered through intelligence briefings, which see Iran as a hostile problem, and through the lens of pro-Israeli thinktanks.
If Netanyahu’s comments appear eerily familiar, it is because they are. The same Netanyahu, and Iran hawks in the US, pushed a similar argument in the run-up to the invasion of Iraq in 2003. Iraqis then, like Iranians, the world was told, would welcome the removal of Saddam. The Middle East would be reshaped.
Meaningful regime change, however (whatever that means in practical terms), is not the same as regime destruction.
In Iraq, where ultimately an incompetent US effort was made at nation-building, and Libya – where it was not – there followed periods of bloody chaos, which continues in Libya.
Ironically, it is not a story unfamiliar in Iran’s own revolution. While there is a tendency, through historical foreshortening, to see the Islamic revolution emerging fully formed in 1979 – the reality is that the fall of the shah triggered a period of competition in Iran between conservative Islamists, communists and different factions within both the Shia clergy and revolutionary cadres.
And the notion that Netanyahu and Israel will be seen as a distant saviour is a dubious one at best.
“Iranian activists, people who fought for freedom and justice all their lives, first of all know that their value has little to do with people like Netanyahu,” Arash Azizi, author of the book What Iranians Want, told CNN earlier this week.
Ali Vaez argued on the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace’s Pivotal States podcast, only days before Israel launched its attack, that historically many Iranians – himself included – have been nervous of sudden change.
“I was born after the revolution. Obviously there was a high degree of dissatisfaction within the country even in the 1990s when I was a teenager.
“I think there was this sense in my generation and in my parents’ generation that radical change often results in a worse outcome. It ends in grief. It rarely brings about a better situation.
“Reform is better. Evolutionary change is better. That was the concept that we were pursuing.”
Democracy activists in Tehran have echoed that view in recent days: an Israeli war does not help them.
What is clear is that Israel sees regime destruction as an end in its own right, with no interest in Iran’s future beyond weakening and destabilising a regional rival.
That is entirely in line with Israel’s long-term approach to what it perceives as security issues. Israel backed Hamas against Fatah, a policy whose consequences are visible in the carnage in Gaza today. It backed the South Lebanese army (SLA) in Lebanon, until the SLA’s collapse amid the emergence of Hezbollah.
Now Israel is arming violent criminal factions in Gaza against Hamas amid the overwhelming sense that Netanyahu has no plan for Gaza’s future even as he is reducing it to rubble.
Netanyahu’s enthusiasm for regime change appears to be viewed – for now at least – with some scepticism in Washington.
“They might be more comfortable with regime change than we are,” a US official told Axios. “They may be more comfortable with destroying the country than we are.”
Iraq and Libya also demonstrate the practical difficulties of a violent transition between regimes. In Iraq, US and other officials promoted figures from the Iraqi exile diaspora, such as Ahmed Chalabi, while having, for a protracted period, a negligible grasp of emerging centres of influence or tribal and sectarian tensions.
In Libya – in the immediate aftermath of Gaddafi – that dynamic was even more in evidence as international missions, including European, struggled as midwives to a transitional government without authority, and challenged by warlordism, even as other powers including the UAE and Russia moved into the vacuum.
Long-term Iran watchers are also highly dubious that Israel can engineer a path to regime destruction through aerial warfare, even in the event of decapitation with the killing of the supreme leader, Ali Khamenei. They point out that the Israeli offensive could just as easily allow the regime to retrench and accelerate efforts to acquire a nuclear weapon.
More widely there is a risk that Israel’s efforts to destabilise Iran could lend new legitimacy to the clerical regime, even in Middle Eastern countries profoundly suspicious of it as they grow increasingly anxious over Israel’s increasingly violent reach.
“With Israel’s expansion of its offensive to include Iran, there is no telling where the boundaries of this battleground will end,” King Abdullah of Jordan said on Tuesday. His country has faced the recent challenge of hosting both Syrian and Iraqis fleeing their civil conflicts. “And that is a threat to people everywhere. Ultimately, this conflict must end,” he added.
Peter Beaumont is a senior international correspondent for the Guardian and former Jerusalem correspondent. He covered the invasion of Iraq and its aftermath, the Libyan revolution and has reported from Tehran.
Tributes are being made to the passengers who died on the Air India flight bound for London Gatwick airport that crashed shortly after takeoff from Ahmedabad in western India.
There were 242 passengers and crew onboard the plane, including 169 Indian nationals, 53 Britons, seven Portuguese nationals and one Canadian.
One passenger, the 40-year-old British national Vishwash Kumar Ramesh, survived the crash and was treated in hospital for injuries.
Here are some of those reported to have died:
Ajay Kumar Ramesh was sitting alongside his brother Vishwash on the opposite side of the aisle. The brothers had been travelling home after visiting family in India.
Joshi, who worked at the Royal Derby hospital, is believed to have been travelling back from India, where his wife and children were based.
The Derby Hindu Temple paid tribute to the family on its Facebook page, saying: “Dr Joshi [and his family] were devotees of our Mandir and supported us through their sincere service and dedication.”
Neil Ryan, who lived next door to them for two years, also described them as “the nicest family”.
Akeel Nanabawa, 36, lived in Gloucester.
The businessman built up a recruitment company, Rec2go, before establishing Iceberg Recruitment Services. The company’s head office is in Gloucester but it also has a branch in Ahmedabad, its website states.
His business partner, Shoyeb Khan Nagori, told MailOnline: “I had dinner with them last night. They were a lovely family and Akeel and his wife were extremely successful people.”
Vorajee, 30, a trained midwife, was the head of finance at Rec2go.
In a statement paying tribute to the family, their imam, Abdullah Samad, said: “Together, [Nanabawa and Vorajee] were committed advocates for humanitarian causes – particularly the suffering of innocent Palestinians and the urgent need for accessible medical care in parts of India.
“They were widely loved and deeply respected. His quiet generosity, her warmth and kindness and their daughter’s bright, joyful spirit made a lasting impact on everyone who knew them.”
Their neighbour Safeer Shah, 47, said the family had been on holiday in Malaysia and Indonesia before heading to the Gujarat state of India to surprise Nanabawa’s father for Eid al-Adha festivities.
The family had moved from Newport, south Wales, about 10 years ago. Nanabawa travelled to India regularly for business, he added.
Nanabawa had three brothers who lived in the Tredworth area of Gloucestershire, as well as his mother, Shah said. “They had plans for the future,” he said.
Nextdoor neighbours Henry and Ros Rickards, who have lived in the street for about 30 years, said the family were the best neighbours. “Sara was the loveliest girl; she loved our dog,” said Ros. “The dog never barked at her – she was so lovely. She was a gorgeous little girl.”
Fiongal, 39, and Jamie Greenlaw-Meek, 45, ran the Wellness Foundry in south London and Ramsgate, Kent, a business offering psychic readings, tarot, reiki and yoga, and had partnered with major brands such as Netflix, Google and Dior.
The couple married in 2022, with Jamie praising his “wonderful husband” in a Facebook post, and thanking him for “keeping me calm in times of stress (sunshine after the rain)”. He added that his heart was “so full of love and gratitude”.
A former fashion designer, Fiongal founded the Wellness Foundry in late 2018 after experiencing a spiritual awakening following a mysterious illness, according to its website.
His husband, a former professional dancer, joined the team in March 2023 as co-director and head of events. He also offered psychic readings and life coaching. Both were alumni of the College of Psychic Studies.
The couple were returning home after a 10-day wellness retreat. The couple captured the happy time they had in India in a series of social media posts, including getting henna tattoos, shopping for fine fabrics and other gifts and driving through chaotic traffic in a tuk-tuk.
They arrived in Ahmedabad just a day before flying back. Fiongal had posted in a video: “So, it’s our last night in India and we’ve had a magical experience. Some mind-blowing things have happened. We are going to put all this together and create a vlog. It’s my first ever vlog about the whole trip and we want to share it.”
In the airport before takeoff, the pair filmed a video of themselves joking before the 10-hour flight back to London. Fiongal said the pair were “going back happily, happily, happily calm”.
Adam Taju, 72, and his 70-year-old wife, Hasina, were flying with their son-in-law, Altafhusen Patel, 51, who lives in London with his wife.
The couple’s granddaughter, Ammaarah Taju, spoke of her shock and disbelief at her parents’ home in Blackburn. She said her father, Altaf Taju, had driven to London to be with his sister as they received updates about the crash from Air India and government officials.
Javed Ali Syed, a hotel manager at the Best Western Kensington Olympia hotel in London, and his wife, Mariam, were travelling with their children, Zayn, five, and Amani, four. Syed was an award-winning hotelier and had previously worked for the Comfort Inn London. Mariam worked at Harrods.
Friends of the couple, who lived in the Belgrave area of Leicester, told Leicestershire Live of their shock at losing two people they described as “lovely”.
Margi, 30, a close friend, said: “It’s devastating. They were very good people. I can’t believe it’s happened.”
Margi said she knew Avaiya, 27, and Patel, 28, through her husband, who had been travelling to Gatwick airport to collect the couple when he learned of the crash. She said: “My husband was on his way to pick them up yesterday from Gatwick but halfway he got the news.”
Avaiya worked with Margi’s husband, where they had built a close friendship over several years, she said. “The couple were also active members of their local temple community, where they were known for their kindness and generosity,” she added. Avaiya also volunteered at the temple.
Raxa Modha, 55, from Wellingborough, Northamptonshire, and her two-year-old grandson, Rudra, were believed to have been flying back to England for a cremation and memorial service for Modha’s late husband.
Modha had been in India for some time, fulfilling the dying wish of her husband, Kishor, who had wanted to live out his last days in his homeland. He died there in April. They were returning to the UK to organise a prayer meeting later this month at the Highfield community centre in Wellingborough.
The couple, who ran an Indian food catering firm called Pooja Caterers, had three children and one grandchild. It thought that Kishan, Modha’s son, was taking another flight home.
Speaking to MailOnline, a family friend said: “It’s incredibly sad, the whole family is already grieving Kishor’s death.”
Jaya Tailor, who lives in Wellingborough, said she knew Modha personally and that she was “a real people’s person”.
“She helped her husband build a business,” she said. “She loved having people around her. She was kind, generous [and] loving.”
The sisters, in their 20s, were on their way back to London after having made a surprise trip to visit their grandmother for her birthday.
Dhir was doing a degree in fashion design while Heer worked as a product manager in the investment and renewable energy sector.
The Baxis’ elder brother, Ishan, told the Telegraph: “I can’t express what my complete family is going through – shell-shocked … is what I can say right now.
“Both had a natural aura of helping and always cared about family values. They both had aspirations to be successful enough to roam around the world, tension-free. Along with their parents, they both had a proclivity towards modernisation without changing traditional values.
“Both my sisters know what is right and what is wrong, thus whatever work they carried out, in academics or fashion, they always got success with no conflicts amongst peers or seniors.”
Renjitha Gopakumaran Nair was returning to the UK after a holiday to see family in her home country. The nurse and mother had just left her job at Queen Alexandra hospital in Portsmouth, Hampshire, and is thought to have been in the UK for a year.
Her former colleagues at the NHS hospital said she was a “beautiful lady” who showed her patients and co-workers “so much love and care”.
Gopakumaran, said to be in her 40s, “had the biggest heart and brightest smile”, one former colleague said.
Arjunbhai Patoliya, 37, had travelled to India from London to scatter the ashes of his late wife, Bharatiben Patel, in a river in the village that they both grew up in. She had died just three weeks earlier from cancer.
The pair are survived by their two daughters,eight and four years old. The children had been left with Patel’s sister while their father flew to Vadiya in Gujarat. A close friend and neighbour of Patoliya told the Telegraph: “He is just like my son. He was a nice person, a very nice person. It’s an accident. I don’t know what to say, I’m speechless – such a lovely neighbour. He was such a lovely character, he looked after me as well from time to time.”
Patoliya was a furniture designer and was described by the neighbour as being a “family” person who was very active in the community.
Sayedmiya Inayatali, 48, had flown over to India to visit his 90-year-old mother with his wife, Nafisabanu, 46, and their children.
Shahid Vhora, 52, a relative, had texted the family before the flight to let them know he would pick them up at Gatwick when they arrived.
He told Metro: “I can’t believe this has happened. I was preparing to pick them up. They had been visiting Sayedmiya’s mother.
“They took a picture as they were about to board. They were so happy to be coming home … When I received the news of the crash I was devastated. We are a very close family, we all live together. My life has been torn apart.”
Sayedmiya was an IT programmer who lived in Wembley with his family. Vhora described the family as “perfect” and very hard-working, adding that Taskin was studying to be a doctor and Waqueeali had been working in IT like his father.
He said: “Sayedmiya and myself did everything together. We have had so many happy times. Now I have to go to India to try to sort things out.”
Adnan Master, 30, was visiting relatives in India with his wife and child. It is understood he was travelling back to London by himself; his family live in Forest Hill.
A friend of Master told the Telegraph that he was “probably one of the nicest guys you’d ever meet”. They added that he had two jobs, both as a delivery driver and working in a DIY shop in east London.
They said: “He was just one of the hardest-working people you’d ever meet. He just didn’t stop, and everything he did was for his family. Everything he spoke about was for his family: ‘I want to make my child have a good life.’”
Vijay Rupani, a former chief minister of Gujarat who led the state until 2021, was killed in the crash. A tribute was made to the member of the governing BJP party by the Indian prime minister, Narendra Modi, who remembered Rupani as “simple and gentle in nature” and “hard-working”.
Rupani was travelling back to London, where his family had planned a Father’s Day and religious celebration. The family has since travelled to India, the Guardian understands, and had met Modi.
“I am not ready to accept that Vijaybhai is no more with us,” Modi said in a tribute on X. “We have worked shoulder to shoulder in many challenging times. Vijaybhai, who was simple and gentle in nature, was very hard-working and committed to the ideology of the party.”
For 15 years, Nagarwas headteacher of Northfleet nursery school in Kent. She is remembered by her grandchildren as “the heart of the family”.
“She shaped our lives in more ways than we can count and she will be sorely missed,” said a Facebook post by her granddaughter Ciara Chudasama.
A tribute from Northfleet nursery school remembered Nagar as more than just an educator.
“She was a guiding light, an inspiration, and a champion for every child and staff member lucky enough to walk through her doors.”
Gopakumaran, 42, was returning to the UK where she worked as a nurse after a visit to her village in Kerala.
She is remembered as “the brightest among all the children in our family”, her uncle Unnikrishnan Panthaplavil told Indian news outlet The Quint.
Mistry, 24, was dropped off by her father at Ahmedabad airport, when Suraj Mistry took a family photograph, not knowing it would be their last as she promised to meet again soon.
Speaking at the Civil hospital in Ahmedabad, a tearful Mistry told the Guardian he remembered his daughter as “a wonder” and “beautiful, inside and out”.
“She lit up every room with her smile, she could strike up a friendship with anyone,” he said. “That’s just who she was.”
Prakash Lal Minarhia had been working as a chef in London for 15 years. He had returned to India to perform rituals after the recent death of his father.
Relatives told the Guardian on Fridaythey still had not been able to bring themselves to inform his mother and wife, who remained in their village, about the crash.
“Until we have his body, nothing is certain,” said Uday Lal Minarhia.
Patel, from a small village in Gujarat, was en route to London for a dream scholarship that he believed would change his family’s life for ever. It was his first-ever international flight.
“Will they give him back to us in a closed box?” his father, Salim Ibrahim, told Al Jazeera over the phone.
“I just … I cannot bear for anyone to see him like that. I want him to be brought home with dignity.”
For many years Gaurav and Kalyani Brahmbhatt had lived in London before returning to Gandhinagar city in Gujarat nearly three years ago, according to local media reports.
“They were extremely hard-working and very friendly, fun-loving, always motivated us to have big dreams,” a friend of the couple, Trupti Telrandhe, told the BBC.
Harshit, 30, had moved to Britain with Pooja, 28, who was studying for a master’s degree. The couple had returned to India to visit a doctor, according to the New York Times.
“They were my everything, they were my support,” Harshit’s father, Anil Patel, said.
Patel, 60, said they would video call each other daily, and on their visit, had sought to get him a passport so he could visit the couple in Leicester.
“They bid goodbye and went happily,” he recalled of their airport exchange.
Christian had travelled to India to join his mother, Ravina, to perform the last rites of his father, who had died a fortnight earlier.
Speaking to the Independent, Ravina said her son “only came for a few days. He was returning on 12 June. Just a short visit – only to honour his father.”
She added: “My husband is gone. And now, so is my son. I have no one left to support me.”
Lawrence had been working hard to create a better life for himself and his mother. “He always said, ‘Mummy, once I’ve paid off the loans on our apartment, I’ll bring you to London,’” she said. “That year will never come.”
Khushboo, 21, was travelling to begin her new life as a married woman in London. Her family travelled more than 310 miles to receive her remains. Investigators identified her by DNA testing.
“She got married on 17 January this year and was awaiting visa clearance to travel to London and live with her husband,” her uncle Kishore Rajpurohit told the Independent.
Her father travelled to see her off at the airport. “He waited till she boarded and had not even crossed Mehsana when we learnt of the crash.,” said her uncle.
Patel, a mother to an eight-year-old boy, was reluctant to travel due to fears of leaving her son behind for the first time, one of her colleagues told the Press Association.
Patel, known as Abdhi, 40, had flown to India a fortnight before to take care of her elderly mother.
“She didn’t want to go,” said Atif Karim, 45, Patel’s colleague and close friend at Zone Beauty Studio in Northampton. “She told me: ‘I just don’t like being away from him.’ It was her first time leaving him, and she was very nervous. She wasn’t excited. It was a sense of duty. Her mum was unwell, but you could tell it was weighing on her.”
Originally from Gujarat, Patel moved to the UK in 2012 and joined the salon in 2016, where she had served as a manager for the last three years.
“She was the most diligent, reliable worker I’ve ever had,” Karim said. “But more than that, she was our friend. She was bubbly, kind, always smiling – she had a way of putting people at ease and always took a genuine interest in their lives. She got on with everyone and left a real mark on the people she worked with and the customers she served.”
After the crash, a fundraiser, with a target of £50,000, has been launched to support Patel’s husband and son, raising more than £4,000 in its first few days.
Makwana, 42, is the first British national to die in the crash whose remains have been returned by authorities. Her family held a funeral on Sunday at Pensionpora cemetery in Vadodara, in Gujarat.
Her uncle Joseph Patelia told the Telegraph that before the flight took off on Thursday she had called her father, Edwin Patelia, to reassure him that she had boarded safely and would call again once she had landed in London.
“That call never came. She vanished just like that, leaving us in shock, in tears, unable to believe what we were hearing.
“About 15 minutes after that call, her younger sister Anne saw the news of a plane crash. She ran to her father and said: ‘Please check if Elcina was on that flight.’ That’s when our nightmare began.”
Makwana, who used to run a telecoms business with her husband, had visited India for dental treatment – because “it’s quite expensive in the UK” – and to spend time with her parents.
Patelia added: “She’d been having frequent toothaches. She travelled alone, and her husband Alpesh and their two young children, an 11-year-old daughter and a seven-year-old son, arrived here just yesterday.”
Patelia said Makwana was a “gentle soul” and was charitable, supporting poor children in India by funding their education.
“She had struggled a lot in life, moving to London over 15 years ago, taking on part-time jobs to support her family there and her parents here in India. She had no brothers, so she took on every responsibility herself.
“Her loss is devastating. She was the bond that held our entire family together.”
Patel was reportedly on his way to visit his son, daughter-in-law and grandchildren in the Somerset village of Pensford.
Patel, who was originally from Lambhvel village in Gujarat, was well-known in Pensford as he spent most summers there, often helping out in the post office run by his son Umang Patel, the Bristol Post said.
Umang, his wife, Vaishali, and their two sons have reportedly travelled to India to be with family while they await formal identification of Patel’s body.
Villagers in Pensford, south of Bristol, have raised nearly £10,000 online to support the family.
Katrina Southgate, the organiser of the fundraiser, said: “We are fundraising to support Umang and Vaishali of Pensford Post Office to help after Umang’s father was a victim of the recent Air India crash.
“The family are a core part of the Pensford community – villagers speak about their kindness and willingness to help others, and there is no greater reward after a hard day at school than a trip to the post office! So, let’s pay it back and show them how much the community supports them at this time.”
Missiles follow trajectories. So do countries. And over the past few days, Israel’s attacks have dramatically changed Iran’s trajectory.
Some believe that Iran was already on a downward spiral and that Israel’s actions will simply accelerate the descent. In an op-ed published on Monday, several of Iran’s most prominent civil society figures, including Nobel peace prize laureate Narges Mohammadi, declared that the “only credible path to safeguard [Iran] and its people is the resignation of the current leadership”. In this view, the war could be construed as a deliverance – Israeli officials are openly suggesting that their operations could lead to regime change in Iran. But if Iran’s decline was already precipitous, why are ordinary Iranians terrified by the outbreak of war? Why have they not welcomed Benjamin Netanyahu as the saviour he imagines himself to be?
The answer is that Israel is harming, not improving Iran’s trajectory, the arc of which had recently been bent upwards through the persistent efforts of the Iranian people. Iran has long undershot its potential, held back by a sclerotic and oppressive government that has failed to undertake necessary reforms. Yet despite many headwinds, the country has been experiencing slow but steady improvements in its political, economic and social conditions over the past few years. Iran’s people have been successfully pushing back against the authoritarian tendencies of the leaders in Tehran. Now they have been thrust into a war devised by an authoritarian leader in Jerusalem.
When the hardliner president Ebrahim Raisi died in a helicopter crash a little over a year ago, Iran’s political establishment reconsidered whether the authoritarian consolidation that had taken place during his term had been worthwhile. Manipulation of elections and brutal suppression of protests had left Iran’s ruling elite distrusted and unpopular. Iran’s current president, Masoud Pezeshkian, was elected to repair Iran’s social contract. His first speech as president included an important admission. “We make promises, and we fail to fulfil them,” he said, acknowledging the degraded legitimacy of the Islamic Republic. Less than a year into his tenure, and until the fateful events of the last few days, Pezeshkian had made some modest progress in trying to regain the trust of the electorate.
Iran’s leaders have had to acknowledge the power and perseverance of Iranian women, who mobilised during the Women, Life, Freedom movement in 2022 and never looked back. When the Iranian parliament passed a draconian mandatory veiling law late last year, Pezeshkian described it as an “unjust law”, a confession that the Islamic Republic will itself remain unjust so long as it fails to protect the rights of women. No longer a fringe issue, women’s rights are now at the forefront of the fight for political renewal in Iran.
Pezeshkian had also presided over a modest economic recovery, though he does not deserve credit for it. Despite the pressure of US sanctions, Iran’s economy had returned to growth, owing to the resourcefulness of the managerial class and resilience of the workforce. But in recent months, inflation rebounded, and the country was rocked by major protests over controversial fuel subsidy reforms, underscoring the need for better management of the economy. On Monday, Iran’s parliament confirmed Seyed Ali Madanizadeh, a young economist trained at Stanford University and the University of Chicago, would become economy minister. In an interview last week, Madanizadeh stated that economic reforms “are not something that can happen without bringing people on board and opening up a dialogue with the public”.
But it is in the space of foreign policy that Iran’s course has altered most dramatically. Six years of intensive dialogue with regional neighbours, especially the UAE and Saudi Arabia, has led to renewed ties. In just the last few months, Tehran hosted the emir of Qatar, the diplomatic adviser to the president of the UAE, and the defence minister of Saudi Arabia. The new regional policy was summed up by the Iranian foreign minister, Abbas Araghchi, when he stated: “Our neighbours are our priority.”
Even Iran’s relationships with its proxies have changed. Iran moderated its support for the Houthis as part of a deal reached with Saudi Arabia in March 2023. More recently, the fall of Bashar al-Assad and Israel’s hobbling of Hamas and Hezbollah were strategic setbacks for Iran. But these events also gave rise to a robust debate among Iran’s national security leaders about whether the “forward defence” strategy, rather than making Iran more secure, had given rise to anti-Iranian sentiment across the region, while still leaving Iran vulnerable to attack.
Finally, and most consequentially, Iran was negotiating a nuclear deal with the US. The seriousness of these negotiations should be underlined. President Donald Trump tore up the nuclear deal in 2018 at a time when Iran was in full compliance with its commitments. He reimposed sanctions, pushed Iran’s economy back into steep recession, and brought the region to the brink of war by assassinating Gen Qassem Suleimani in January 2020.
Not long after Trump was inaugurated for his second term, Iran’s supreme leader, Ali Khamenei, called negotiations with the United States “unwise”. But senior officials, including Pezeshkian, Araghchi and parliament speaker Mohammad Bagher Ghalibaf, pushed back. They may have done so because of personal convictions, but they probably recognised that the Iranian people are tired of enmity with the US, which has left Iran isolated and embattled.
The first round of negotiations took place on 12 April. Four subsequent rounds were conducted in just two months – the progress was evident enough that even Israeli officials were briefing journalists that a deal between Iran and the US was “likely”. A sixth round of negotiations was slated to take place on Sunday in Oman. Those talks were cancelled after Israel’s attacks, which Trump cheered.
The Iranian people have struggled for over a century against forces of authoritarianism, which can seem endemic in the Middle East. At numerous junctures, foreign intervention has undermined their efforts. In 1911, a constitutional revolution was crushed with the intervention of Russian troops. In 1953, Iran’s elected government was ousted in a coup engineered by the CIA and MI6. In 1980, the course of the Islamic Revolution was altered when Saddam Hussein invaded Iran. In 2018, Trump withdrew from the nuclear deal, dooming Iran’s once influential and popular reformist movement, which had staked so much on the promise of sanctions relief.
With each of these setbacks, ordinary Iranians persisted. Until a few days ago, something was shifting in Iran. Tentatively but noticeably, the country was moving in a better direction, pushed and pulled by 90 million souls yearning for greater security, prosperity and liberty.
Seen in this context, Israel’s attacks demonstrate a contempt not just for life – the civilian death toll in Iran is mounting – but also a contempt for the agency and aspirations of the Iranian people. They did not want this war and they were pushing their leaders to avoid it, but Israel chose to attack to prevent a new nuclear agreement between the US and Iran.
The Iranian people are no longer in control of their futures, and they find themselves watching the trajectories of ballistic missiles, wondering what could have been.
 Esfandyar Batmanghelidj is the founder of the Bourse & Bazaar Foundation thinktank
One of Europe’s largest music festivals will no longer be held in Serbia and could go “into exile” in Germany or a neighbouring Balkan state after Belgrade withheld funding over its support of the country’s anti-corruption student protesters.
Exit festival, which is held every July in a medieval bastion fortress in Serbia’s second city, Novi Sad, was founded in 2000 by student activists from the protest movement that helped topple Slobodan Milošević. Affordable ticket prices and starry lineups mean it has acquired a reputation as Europe’s premier music event with a social conscience, with 210,000 people from more than 80 countries attending in 2024.
On Friday, however, Exit’s organisers announced that its 25th anniversary edition from 10 to 13 July this year “will be the last to take place” in Serbia, citing “undemocratic pressures” from the government of the president, Aleksandar Vučić.
Novi Sad has emerged as the hub of the protests that have swept the Balkan state since a concrete canopy collapsed on to a busy pavement at the city’s central station last year, killing 14 people. On its social media channels, Exit has endorsed the demands of student protesters, calling for the resignation of the responsible minister and a full investigation into the disaster.
The festival has donated food and sleeping bags to protesters blocking access to universities and municipal buildings, and plans to give student activists their own stage at this year’s festival.
The festival’s outspoken stance appears to have drawn the ire of the government, with authorities withholding about €1.5m in national and regional tourism grants and some sponsors dropping out.
“The only way we could continue the festival beyond this year is if we decided not to be free from political influence,” said Exit’s founder, Dušan Kovačević, explaining that his festival needs about 15% direct government funding to remain affordable but usually brings approximately €25m into the Serbian economy every year. “And we cannot be threatened.”
Authorities say their “strategic repositioning” is not politically motivated, blaming financial pressures for being unable to provide support.
“They are trying to govern by fear,” Kovačević said. “That’s not the way to go, especially in a country with a political history like Serbia’s.”
Kovačević said he was in talks to hold “Exit in exile” iterations of the festival from 2026 after receiving invitations to hold musical events in Germany and several countries in the Balkans, as well as in Egypt. “We may do it for one year, or maybe two or maybe five,” he added.
This year’s festival has a lineup that includes the Prodigy, Sex Pistols, the French producer DJ Snake and the Russian singer Nina Kraviz.
Asked whether Exit would leave its home country permanently, the festival’s organisers said: “It remains too early to say if or under what conditions the festival will return to Serbia.”
The government has been approached for comment.
A 10th-century burial site believed to have belonged to a Viking noble family has been discovered in northern Denmark, packed with a “spectacular” trove of ancient objects, a museum has said.
The discovery came almost by chance when pearls, coins, ceramics and a box containing a gold thread were unearthed during construction work near Lisbjerg, a village located 4 miles (7km) north of Aarhus, Denmark’s second-largest city.
Archaeologists found that the site also contained around 30 graves dating from the second half of the 10th century, when the famous King Harald Bluetooth reigned, said the Moesgaard Museum in Aarhus.
According to the museum’s archaeologist Mads Ravn, the graves are probably linked to a noble family from the Viking age whose farm was discovered less than a kilometre from the burial site in the late 1980s.
“This could have been one of Harald Bluetooth’s earls or stewards,” Ravn said on Tuesday.
Ravn noted that the king, who introduced Christianity to what is today Denmark and after whom, much later, the wireless technology Bluetooth was named, tasked nobles with managing certain regions.
Researchers also discovered some human remains, such as teeth and bones, at the site.
“People basically took what was important to them into the grave because they wanted to transfer it to the other world,” the archaeologist said.
One of the graves, which scientists believe belonged to an important woman, contained a box filled with decorative objects and a pair of scissors.
Sign up to This is Europe
The most pressing stories and debates for Europeans – from identity to economics to the environment
after newsletter promotion
The “magnificent” box is a remarkable find, according to Ravn, with only a few having been discovered before, including one in south-east Germany. “It’s very rare. There’s only three of them we know of,” he said.
The excavations at Lisbjerg are due to be completed this week, after which experts will begin a thorough analysis of the objects recovered.
Wooden objects in particular should help them accurately date the burial site.
As a royal and commercial centre, Aarhus was one of Denmark’s most important cities during the Viking age between the eighth and 11th centuries.
The always likable figure of Irish producer and film-maker Frank Mannion has, in the past, given us a cordial guide to champagne, a slightly more chaotic essay on Britishness, and its counterpart on Irishness. Now, in his cheerfully celebratory and slightly corporate-promo way, he has made a film about Irish viticulture and drink in general, which means not simply wineries, breweries and distilleries actually in Ireland, but also abroad: this is about drinks producers with an Irish background, such as Hennessy brandy, which has an obvious Irish ancestry.
It’s what this film calls “an Irish drink in a French terroir” – or, in fact, a terroir anywhere in the world, meaning places in Europe, the US and occasionally Australia and New Zealand. The film even jauntily insists that Ireland invented whiskey before Scotland. Prince Albert II of Monaco is interviewed about his love of Irish viticulture and the importance of his mother, Grace Kelly, one of the Kellys of County Mayo. The chief interviewee, however, is the amiable Oz Clarke, himself of Irish heritage, who beamingly descants on how great Irish wine is.
This is a film that is genially untroubled and unproblematic in its approach; the issue of, say, the homogenisation and industrialisation of wine production that, a generation ago, worried film-maker Jonathan Nossiter in his 2004 film Mondovino, is absent. Mannion and his interviewees are content to simply find a range of nuances and differences, although the garrulous tone of Mannion’s film is not so far from Rossiter’s. The most startling moments of the film come when he visits the Baileys farm in County Wicklow, whose proprietor talks about the cows who produce the raw material for Baileys Irish Cream: his 230 “ladies”. This will be an acquired taste, perhaps.
 A Sip of Irish is in UK and Irish cinemas from 20 June.
Russia launched a sustained missile and drone attack on Kyiv in the early hours of Tuesday, killing at least 16 people and wounding more than 100 in what the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskyy, called “one of the most horrific attacks” on the Ukrainian capital since the full-scale war began in spring 2022.
Officials warned that the death toll from one of the deadliest Russian attacks on Kyiv this year could rise, as rescue operations continue.
At a nine-storey Soviet-era apartment block in the west of Kyiv, an apparent direct missile hit had led to part of the building collapsing, leaving a gaping hole and a pile of rubble in the middle of the block.
Thirty apartments were destroyed in the strike, said the mayor of Kyiv, Vitali Klitschko, surveying the scene. “There could be people under the rubble, and we can’t exclude that the number of dead may rise,” he said. It was not clear how many people had been inside the building when the missile hit and there were conflicting reports of death tolls.
As dawn broke, hundreds of rescue workers were attempting to clear the rubble at the site and rescue those stuck in neighbouring apartments. Shops and buildings within a radius of two blocks also suffered damage and smashed windows.
The interior minister, Ihor Klymenko, said: “A ballistic missile had a direct hit on a nine-storey apartment building, a section is destroyed, and is destroyed right down to the basement because it was a direct hit.”
Wave after wave of drone attacks could be heard during the night, with the air raid siren active for several hours and thousands of Kyiv residents sheltering in metro stations. The sounds reverberated from buildings across the city as air defence units tried to fend off the attacks. As the city came back to life on Tuesday morning, there was a burning smell in the air of central Kyiv and a cloud of dark smoke hung over the outskirts.
“Kyiv has faced one of the most horrific attacks,” Zelenskyy wrote on Facebook. “Right now in Kyiv, efforts are under way to rescue people from under the rubble of an ordinary residential building – it’s still unclear how many remain trapped.”
Speaking at the G7 in Canada, the Ukrainian president said he had been kept in touch about the scale of the attack as he flew to the summit, where he had hoped to meet Donald Trump to make a direct appeal to the US president about the need to impose much deferred US sanctions on Russia.
As he met the G7 host, the Canadian prime minister, Mark Carney, Zelenskyy made no direct reference to Trump’s decision to leave the summit a day early, so avoiding a meeting with the Ukrainian leader. But, looking downbeat, he said: “We need the help of our allies for our soldiers to stay strong until Russia is ready for peace negotiations.”
He stressed: “We are ready for an unconditional ceasefire.”
Some Ukrainian diplomats are privately furious at Trump’s snub, even saying they are not sure it is worth the Ukrainian president turning up to the Nato summit in The Hague next week. One official said: “It is an occupational hazard that Ukraine is a victim of events and Trump’s attention span. Putin knows that, which is why there may have been such a large attack last night. There had been all sorts of promises, including new arms deliveries being offered.”
Russia has launched almost nightly attacks on Ukraine over more than three years of full-scale war, but direct hits on Kyiv are rare, as the capital is well protected by air defence systems. Moscow has launched a record number of drones and missiles in recent weeks, partly in apparent revenge for an audacious Ukrainian drone operation that targeted long-range bombers stationed at bases deep inside Russia.
Overnight, Russian drone strikes also struck the southern Ukrainian port city of Odesa, killing one person and injuring 17 others, according to Oleh Kiper, the head of the regional administration.
US-led attempts to start a peace process have largely failed, with Russia ignoring Trump’s demands to agree to a full ceasefire before talks begin. Direct talks in Istanbul have produced little in the way of progress and there is no sign that Russia is willing to abandon its maximalist war aims.
Zelenskyy had been hoping that the G7 summit would represent a golden chance to apply collective western pressure on Trump to accept a cut in the oil cap from $60 a barrel to $45 in an effort to reduce Russian oil revenues. The oil price cap requiring complex enforcement was introduced by the G7 nations and it would need at least tacit US support to be reduced effectively.
In discussions on Monday at the summit, Trump expressed his reluctance to impose any further sanctions on Russia, saying Europeans should “do it first” and that “sanctions cost us a lot of money, billions and billions of dollars”.
Meanwhile, Russia is deepening its ties with North Korea, the secretive state that is emerging as one of Moscow’s main allies in its war on Ukraine.
On Tuesday, Sergei Shoigu, Putin’s top security adviser, made his third visit in as many months to Pyongyang, where he announced that North Korea would send thousands of construction workers to help rebuild Russia’s Kursk region.
The Russian state news agency, Tass, cited Shoigu as saying: “Chairman Kim Jong-un has decided to send 1,000 sappers to Russia to de-mine Russian territory, as well as 5,000 military construction workers to rebuild infrastructure facilities destroyed by the occupiers.”
North Korea has previously sent more than 10,000 troops to support Russian efforts to retake the Kursk region, parts of which had been seized by Ukrainian forces. It has also transferred conventional weapons to aid Moscow’s war effort, while western intelligence believes Pyongyang may be seeking Russian technological assistance to advance its nuclear weapons programme.
During his three presidential campaigns, Donald Trump ran as an opponent of serial military interventions and wars of “regime change” à la Iraq and Libya, which neoconservatives and liberal internationalists alike had embraced after the end of the cold war. He correctly sensed that many Americans had tired of “forever wars”.
Benjamin Netanyahu’s attack on Iran is a watershed moment for Trump. It will force him to reveal whether he truly represents a clean break with the foreign policy establishment, often referred to as “the blob”, or is in fact a continuation of it. It all depends on whether he decides to join Israel’s attacks on Iran.
Trump faces a tough choice. Israel has strong, longstanding, deep and variegated support in the US, and Netanyahu may seek substantial American military engagement, even military intervention. He’s already begun setting the stage. In a flattery-filled birthday missive, he gushed that Trump has “done great things for Israel” and that “we’re dealing with something that will threaten all of us sooner or later. Our victory will be your victory”.
Netanyahu bombed Iran when Washington and Tehran were still negotiating the future of its nuclear enrichment program, and reportedly despite hearing from the US that an attack could jeopardise the talks. Netanyahu opposed any agreement because of two firmly held beliefs. First: a nuclear-armed Iran can be prevented only by destroying its entire enrichment infrastructure. Second: Iran’s threat to Israel isn’t limited to nuclear weapons; the Islamic Republic’s ideology rejects the very existence of a Jewish state in historic Palestine. These two convictions explain why Netanyahu has not only targeted Iran’s nuclear installations but also urged Iranians to overthrow their government.
Trump must decide whether he wants to join a war guided by these two goals. If he jumps in, he’ll reveal himself to be no different from the blob; if he doesn’t, he risks running afoul of Israel’s most fervent American allies – not just Jewish organisations, but also voting blocs such as evangelical Christians. There has been much debate about whether Netanyahu sandbagged Trump, or whether Trump greenlighted the war from the outset because, despite his self-presentation as a foreign policy maverick, he, like Joe Biden – whom he loves to malign – is in fact an unalloyed supporter of Israel.
Regardless of which theory is accurate, Trump confronts a hard decision. He can either back Netanyahu’s war or tell him that having started it unilaterally, he’s on his own. Trump could try to split the difference by limiting himself to what he is already doing: helping to intercept Israel-bound Iranian drones and missiles, while steering clear of a military clash with Iran.
Yet if Iran’s missile barrages intensify and Israel experiences far more death and destruction than it has so far, that gambit could fail. Trump will face intense pressure to enter the fray to defend Israel. But prominent members of the Maga movement’s isolationist-oriented wing will oppose a war with Iran. One of them, Tucker Carlson, has already accused the president of being “complicit” in Israel’s war on Iran and betraying his “America first” foreign policy pledge, and his sentiments have wider purchase.
Netanyahu has put Trump in a bind – unnecessarily. Iran did not attack Israel. Nor was it preparing to, which means that Netanyahu’s attack was not a pre-emptive one necessitated by the imperative of beating an adversary to the punch. Both variants of self-defence-based war have a basis in international law and military ethics. Netanyahu’s war doesn’t belong to either genre. It is a preventive war comparable to George W Bush’s attack on Iraq and Putin’s invasion of Ukraine. Both were justified by invoking a hypothetical threat; neither was necessitated by a clear and present danger.
Netanyahu has been warning about a nuclear-equipped Iran since 1992, when he predicted that Tehran would build the bomb in three to five years. If an Iran with nuclear weapons is Netanyahu’s nightmare, he should have applauded, not lambasted, the joint comprehensive plan of action (JCPOA) that the Obama administration and Iran signed in 2015. Once Trump was elected, Netanyahu convinced him to defenestrate that deal. The JCPOA’s provisions – some extended to 13 years, others to 15 – eliminated 98% of Iran’s enriched uranium stocks, capped uranium enrichment at 3.67%, dismantled about two-thirds of its centrifuges, placed stringent limits on heavy water production, and incorporated extensive verification measures.
Netanyahu launched the war to scuttle the US-Iran talks and, if possible, bring down the Islamic Republic. Iraq 2003 and Ukraine 2022 prove that “preventive” wars should never be legitimised; they allow leaders excessive, needless and dangerous leeway. Trump therefore has strong grounds to oppose Israel’s attack on Iran. At a press conference at the G7 summit in Canada, he refused to comment when asked whether he would join Israel, but noted that “the United States has always supported Israel”, that Iran wasn’t winning, that Israel “was doing very well”, and that Iran brought the war on itself by spurning his 60-day deadline to sign an agreement and now wanted to talk.
Trump reportedly resisted putting his name to a draft statement calling for de-escalation, produced by the other G7 members, before eventually signing. On the other hand, after Netanyahu said he hadn’t ruled out killing Iran’s supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, several news outlets, citing American officials, reported that Trump “vetoed” that step, no doubt realising that it could make the confrontation careen out of control.
Even assuming that Trump didn’t want Israel to attack when it did, he has manoeuvred to turn events to his advantage, suggesting that the war will compel Iran to sign a deal on his terms. The president’s problem is that this war could continue for days, even weeks. And the longer it lasts, the harder it will be to finesse direct questions with ambiguous replies and to avoid hard decisions, especially if Israel needs direct US help. At some point, Israel’s American supporters and the anti-intervention camp within the US may each ask: “Will the real Donald Trump please stand up?”
Rajan Menon is a professor emeritus of international relations at the City College of New York and a senior research scholar at Columbia University’s Saltzman Institute of War and Peace Studies
As Iran and Israel exchange missile attacks for a fourth day, Democrats in Washington are moving swiftly to reassert congressional authority over US military engagement in the region amid fears of American involvement in a broader conflict.
Tim Kaine, a Democratic senator of Virginia, on Monday introduced a war powers resolution that would prohibit US armed forces from taking direct action against Iran without explicit authorization from Congress or a declaration of war. The measure, like other attempts to claw back power from the executive branch, faces a steep climb in the GOP-controlled Congress, where Republicans have been mostly unwilling to challenge Donald Trump’s authority.
“I am deeply concerned that the recent escalation of hostilities between Israel and Iran could quickly pull the United States into another endless conflict,” Kaine said in a statement. “The American people have no interest in sending service members to fight another forever war in the Middle East. This resolution will ensure that if we decide to place our nation’s men and women in uniform into harm’s way, we will have a debate and vote on it in Congress.”
Later on Monday, Senator Bernie Sanders, an independent who votes with Democrats, introduced a separate piece of legislation that would bar the use of federal funds for any use of military force “in or against Iran” without congressional authorization. Several progressive Democrats, including senators Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts and Chris Van Hollen of Maryland joined as sponsors.
“Another war in the Middle East could cost countless lives, waste trillions more dollars and lead to even more deaths, more conflict, and more displacement,” Sanders said in a statement. “I will do everything that I can as a Senator to defend the Constitution and prevent the US from being drawn into another war.”
Sanders has accused Israel of timing its attack on Iran to “sabotage” the latest round of talks between the US and Iran over the future of Iran’s nuclear program that had been scheduled for Sunday but were cancelled.
Trump on Monday said Iranian officials would “like to talk” about de-escalating hostilities with Israel, while Israel indicated its attacks on Iran were not yet finished. Trump – along with Democrats and Republicans – have issued stark warnings to Iran not to strike US targets as it launches retaliatory attacks.
“If we are attacked in any way, shape or form by Iran, the full strength and might of the US Armed Forces will come down on you at levels never seen before,” Trump wrote on Truth Social.
War powers resolutions are considered “privileged” under Senate rules, guaranteeing a floor debate and vote. Even if Kaine’s measure ultimately fails, it will compel lawmakers to confront pressing questions about the US role in the rapidly escalating Middle East conflict – and, more broadly, about presidential war powers and Congress’s constitutional authority over decisions of war and peace.
Kaine’s resolution would not prevent the US from defending itself against imminent threats but would require congressional approval for offensive action. Sanders’ bill contains an exception for self-defense.
On matters of foreign policy, Trump’s coalition includes Iran hawks like Senator Lindsey Graham, as well as “America First” subscribers who share the president’s longstanding opposition to US involvement in foreign conflicts.
Graham on Sunday said he preferred a diplomatic solution, but barring that, he urged the president to “go all in”.
“Make sure that, when this operation is over, there’s nothing left standing in Iran regarding their nuclear program,” he said in an interview on CBS’s Face the Nation. “If that means providing bombs, provide bombs.”
Kaine’s move is part of a long-running effort to rein in presidential war powers, which has in the past brought together unlikely partnerships between Democrats and a growing faction of far-right anti-interventionists.
During Trump’s first term, Kaine led a similar effort to limit Trump’s ability to strike Iran without congressional approval, following the president’s decision to order the killing of Iranian Gen Qasem Soleimani, which brought the US and Iran to the brink of war. Though both chambers of Congress approved the resolution, Trump vetoed it.
That veto followed an earlier one in 2019, when Trump blocked a separate bipartisan War Powers resolution aimed at ending US support for Saudi Arabia’s intervention in Yemen’s civil war – an effort that drew support from Democrats and a small group of anti-interventionist Republicans.
At least 37 Palestinians were killed on Monday in new shootings in Gaza near food distribution centres run by private US contractors guarded by Israeli troops, local authorities said.
Witnesses blamed the shootings on Israeli troops who opened fire early in the morning as crowds of hungry Palestinians converged on two hubs managed by the Gaza Humanitarian Foundation (GHF), a private organisation that recently began operating in Gaza with Israeli and US support.
Coverage of the war in Gaza is constrained by Israeli attacks on Palestinian journalists and a bar on international reporters entering the Gaza Strip to report independently on the war.
Israel has not allowed foreign reporters to enter Gaza since 7 October 2023, unless they are under Israeli military escort. Reporters who join these trips have no control over where they go, and other restrictions include a bar on speaking to Palestinians in Gaza.
Palestinian journalists and media workers inside Gaza have paid a heavy price for their work reporting on the war, with over 180 killed since the conflict began.
The committee to protect journalists has determined that at least 19 of them “were directly targeted by Israeli forces in killings which CPJ classifies as murders”.
Foreign reporters based in Israel filed a legal petition seeking access to Gaza, but it was rejected by the supreme court on security grounds. Private lobbying by diplomats and public appeals by prominent journalists and media outlets have been ignored by the Israeli government.
To ensure accurate reporting from Gaza given these restrictions, the Guardian works with trusted journalists on the ground; our visual​​ teams verif​y photo and videos from third parties; and we use clearly sourced data from organisations that have a track record of providing accurate information in Gaza during past conflicts, or during other conflicts or humanitarian crises.
Emma Graham-Harrison, chief Middle East correspondent
The death toll on Monday was the highest yet reported in the near-daily shootings since the GHF began operations three weeks ago.
Health officials in Gaza said most of Monday’s victims were killed while trying to reach the GHF centre near the southern city of Rafah, which has largely been razed by the Israeli military, and close to a second GHF centre in central Gaza. It said four other people were killed elsewhere.
Two Palestinians trying to get food at the Rafah site, Heba Jouda and Mohammed Abed, told the Associated Press that Israeli forces fired on the crowds at about 4am at the Flag roundabout. The traffic circle, hundreds of metres from the GHF centre, has repeatedly been the scene of shootings.
The International Committee of the Red Cross said on Monday its field hospital in Gaza had received 200 patients, marking the highest number received by the facility in one mass casualty incident.
On Sunday, the same hospital treated 170 people, many of whom “were wounded by gunshots, and who reported that they were trying to access a food distribution site”.
Tens of thousands of Palestinians have been forced to travel long distances and to cross Israeli military-controlled areas in Gaza, often at night, in a desperate and hazardous effort to get food packages from the new centres.
The Israeli military has designated specific routes to access the food hubs, and GHF has warned Palestinians that leaving the roads is dangerous, but many do so in an attempt to get to the scarce food first.
Aid officials said GHF and the Israeli military often give conflicting advice about access to the distribution sites, leading thousands to attempt to access the hubs through zones that are supposedly still off-limits. At least one incident early on Monday morning occurred some distance from a GHF site before it opened.
The Israel Defense Forces claimed that an initial inquiry suggested the toll reported by local authorities was not accurate.
It said in a statement: “Despite warnings that the area is an active combat zone, overnightseveral attempts were made by suspects to approach IDF troops who were operating in the area of Rafah, posing a danger to them. IDF troops operated in order to remove the threat and prevent the suspects from approaching them, and fired warning shots.”
 Israel hopes the GHF will replace the previous comprehensive system of aid distribution run by the United Nations, which Israeli officials claim allowed Hamas to steal and sell aid. Aid agencies deny this, saying their tracing systems are robust.
UN agencies and major aid groups, which have delivered humanitarian aid across Gaza since the start of war, have rejected the new system, saying it is impractical, inadequate and unethical. They deny there is widespread theft of aid by Hamas.
Palestinian health officials say scores of people have been killed and hundreds wounded since the sites opened last month.
A tight blockade on all supplies entering Gaza was imposed by Israel throughout March and April, threatening many of the 2.3 million people who live there with “a critical risk of famine”. The GHF’s provisions so far have been grossly inadequate, humanitarian officials in the devastated territory said.
On Sunday, GHF said it had distributed 36,000 food boxes, totalling more than 2.1m meals.
In Geneva, Volker Türk, the UN high commissioner for human rights, said Israel’s near 20-month offensive in Gaza was inflicting “horrifying, unconscionable suffering” on Palestinians and urged government leaders to “wake up” and exert pressure to bring an end to the conflict.
“The facts speak for themselves,” said Türk at the opening of the latest human rights council session on Monday.
“Everyone in government needs to wake up to what is happening in Gaza. All those with influence must exert maximum pressure on Israel and Hamas, to put an end to this unbearable suffering.”
Türk has repeatedly spoken out about bloodshed in Gaza and called for the release of more than 50 Israeli hostages still held by Hamas and other armed Palestinian militants there.
The Israeli diplomatic mission in Geneva responded by accusing Türk and his office of being “relentless in making irresponsible and uneducated statements regarding Israel’s conduct of hostilities – including reliance on information propagated by terrorist organisations”.
It called on Türk to “condemn Hamas’s declared strategy to maximise harm to the population in Gaza”.
Mario Guevara, a prominent Spanish-language journalist in metro Atlanta who frequently covers immigration and customs enforcement raids, will be turned over to Ice detention after being arrested by local police while covering the “No Kings” protests.
Guevara, 47, was born in El Salvador and has been in the United States for more than 20 years. He recorded his own arrest on Saturday during a raucous street protest in the Embry Hills area of north DeKalb county, an Atlanta suburban neighborhood with a large Latino population. The protest ended with riot police throwing teargas and marching protesters down the street after declaring an unlawful assembly.
About 35 minutes into the video Guevara was live-streaming on Facebook to more than 1 million people, he can be first seen on the sidewalk, then backing away from a police officer approaching him. As he backed into the street, two other police officers immediately arrested him.
“By any chance, are we still live?” he asks in Spanish, in the darkness of a van at the scene. “Someone please call the lawyer Giovanni Díaz, my lawyer, so he can pull the strings he needs to pull. Yes, we’re still live, right? Please, someone let lawyer Giovanni Díaz know what just happened.”
The arresting officer is from the Doraville police department, a municipality which holds part of Atlanta’s famed Buford Highway strip of immigrant-oriented businesses. A second officer approaching Guevara in the video is wearing a gas mask and cannot be identified from his uniform.
Police charged Guevara as a pedestrian improperly entering a roadway, obstruction of a law enforcement officer and unlawful assembly. A municipal judge released Guevara on Monday on a recognisance bond – customary with misdemeanor charges. But jail staff said he would be transferred instead to Immigration and Customs Enforcement officers.
The law office Diaz & Gaeta Law, which represents Guevara, declined to comment. A request for information from Doraville police has gone unanswered.
Police facilitated demonstrator’s march at an earlier protest in the nearby suburban city of Tucker, in which thousands of people walked across an overpass above I-285 – Atlanta’s main ring highway – with banners and signs. The earlier “No Kings” protest had been organized and promoted by Indivisible and 50501.
Conversely, organizers from the Party of Socialism and Liberation led the Embry Hills protest. According to a release from the DeKalb police department, police declared an unlawful assembly after they believed marchers would attempt to approach the highway on the on-ramp.
Police arrested eight people including Guevara at the protest on Saturday.
Ted Terry, a DeKalb county commissioner, asked the county’s staff to investigate the circumstances around the use of teargas at the event.
“The decision to deploy teargas – particularly in a neighborhood context with nearby homes and businesses – raises serious questions about the proportionality and justification of the county’s response to peaceful civil action,” he wrote.
A spokesperson for Ice in Atlanta could not immediately confirm the conditions of the immigration hold or whether Guevara faces deportation.
As a journalist with Diario CoLatino in El Salvador, he fled the country in 2004 one step ahead of threats from leftwing paramilitary groups. It took him seven years to get his first asylum hearing before a judge, the journalist told Spanish-language wire service Agencia EFE in the Los Angeles-based publication La Opinión in 2012. He described the arrest of his wife after an error in the immigration system. “The hardest part for me was seeing my three children cry as she was taken away, and me being powerless to give them the comfort and protection they need,” he said in Spanish in the interview.
Guevara has worked for Spanish-language media such as Atlanta Latino and Mundo Hispanico in metro Atlanta since, reporting on criminal justice issues. Guevara’s reporting has won awards, including an Emmy. His reporting has uncovered corruption at the Honduran consulate in Georgia and documented the effect of immigration enforcement around Atlanta.
He founded MGNews in June last year, focusing on immigration enforcement, and quickly built a sizable following. At the time of his arrest Saturday, Guevara was live-streaming on Facebook to more than 1 million viewers, outdrawing CNN and Fox News combined on a Saturday afternoon.
They created some of the most riveting abstract art of the 20th century, fought Nazis with the gun and the pen, married, divorced and married again. Now the continent-spanning and nigh-forgotten love story of the Burton-Tayloresque couple at the heart of the European avant garde is finally being given its due at a major art institution.
And We’ll Never Be Parted, exhibiting at Prague’s Kunsthalle gallery, is the first show to reunite the Norwegian painter Anna-Eva Bergman and German-born Hans Hartung.
Consisting of 350 items across two floors, the exhibition features paintings, photographs, tools – and the extraordinary breakup letter that spelled the pair’s separation but allowed them to remarry as creative equals 15 years later.
Born in Stockholm to a Swedish father and a Norwegian mother, Bergman trained as an artist in Oslo and Paris, where she and Hartung met and married in 1929 before moving to Dresden. In the early phase of her career she made a living as an illustrator, including of anti-Nazi cartoons.
Hartung, born in Leipzig in 1904, was quicker to hit his stride as a serious artist. His idiosyncratic scribbles, swirls and scratch marks helped him achieve international recognition as a key figure of art informel, a largely European counter-movement to American abstract expressionism. Where the action paintings of Jackson Pollock and Willem de Kooning were often violent in their gestures, Hartung executed his ideas in a more controlled manner, preparing his marks with smaller sketches and a grid system.
Though single works by each featured in a 1932 group show in Oslo, it was Hartung who enjoyed most of the limelight. In their reviews, some critics referred to Bergman simply as Mrs Hartung.
On 14 April 1937, Bergman announced her separation from Hartung in a bluntly phrased letter sent from Sanremo, Italy. While insisting that “the cause is not another man”, it noted that “from an erotic point of view, we are simply not a match”. Above all, what motivated her decision to leave their marriage, she wrote, was the need to develop as an artist in her own right.
“I shall thus try to make my way through the world on my own, and I shall succeed. I must be completely free and alone, and above all with a lot of time – no housework and other worries – to focus just on my own work while still having time to rest on the side.”
Bergman concludes her breakup note with: “May your art always come first, just as before. It has been your strength and perhaps also (on a human level) your weakness.”
Sign up to Art Weekly
Your weekly art world round-up, sketching out all the biggest stories, scandals and exhibitions
after newsletter promotion
After moving back to Norway, she studied ecclesiastical art and the use of gilding, making abstract paintings that drew inspiration from the bleak landscape around her, returning again and again to archetypal natural forms such as mountains, rocks and fjords.
“Without the separation, they wouldn’t have developed as artists in the way they did,” said Theo Carnegy-Tan, one of the show’s curators. “They needed the time apart.”
Having seen communist and Jewish friends “disappeared” under the Nazis, both artists experienced first-hand the rise of fascism. Bergman went into hiding in the Norwegian countryside to avoid being captured by occupying German forces, while Hartung was interrogated and roughed up by the Gestapo.
After war broke out, he refused to serve under the German flag and joined the French foreign legion, later losing a leg after sustaining severe injuries in the Battle of the Vosges in 1944. Confronted with mutilated bodies on the battlefield, and inspired by the Spanish painter Julio González, whose daughter he married after the breakup from Bergman, he returned briefly to more figurative painting.
Yet after writing each other a series of cautious letters, the pair met again for the first time after the end of the war, at a González retrospective in Paris in 1952. “It was love at first sight, again,” said co-curator Pierre Wat.
In 1961, the remarried couple acquired a plot of land to house their villa-studio in Antibes, southern France, where they expanded their artistic practices. They died two years apart, Bergman in 1987 and Hartung in 1989.
While Hartung’s standing as a key figure of abstract expressionism in Europe was advanced immediately after his death, Bergman’s work has been rediscovered only over the past five years. Her first major retrospective was at the Museum of Modern Art in Paris in 2023 and her first solo show at Oslo’s National Museum in 2024.
“Bergman stood outside the big artistic movements of her time, and it took some time for her reputation to be elevated,” said Carnegy-Tan. “It wouldn’t have been right for this reunion to take place until they are treated as equals.”
Poison runs through every aspect of the grooming gang horror. Every element stirs up a particular political bile, from those pathetically vulnerable girls and their vile exploiters, to those well-chosen cases weaponised by the Tories and Faragists with no record of concern for the general plight of children in care.
It’s odd that the Tories should wade in so strenuously when they were in power for the vast majority of this sorry saga, provoking a stream of inquiries, which they mostly ignored. Labour thought the seven years and £187m of Alexis Jay’s second inquiry quite enough. So did she, echoing Keir Starmer’s preference for “action not words”, and for avoiding yet more of the analysis paralysis of the Grenfell years, the infected blood scandal and ongoing Covid inquiries, which satisfy few.
A series of five local investigations was planned, starting in Oldham. Starmer sent Louise Casey to do an audit, and she has returned suggesting a novel format, with a national umbrella body to oversee local inquiries with statutory teeth to compel witnesses to come forward. “Gotcha! U-turn!” shout Reform, the Tories and their favourable front pages, fighting in the political playground regardless of the substance. U-turns, second thoughts, listening to critics and responding to new facts are usually a good thing in governments: we could do with a few more.
As for U-turns, let’s not forget Boris Johnson, who called spending money on investigating child sex abuse “spaffing money up the wall”. The Tories later made him prime minister.
Casey was given a free hand to “uncover the nature, scale and profile” of group child sexual exploitation, to root out evidence on offenders and their ethnicity. No surprise that she found plentiful cases where authorities had turned away, some for fear of being called racist. Last week’s trial of seven Rochdale men of Pakistani origin told the same story: of groomers raping and drugging very young girls, and showing “no remorse for their unforgivable actions”, while officialdom also treated these children as trash. Social workers dismissed witness girl B as “a prostitute”, aged 10.
Blame spreads far and wide. Those seeking a culture war weapon will find it turned back on them. A timeline in Casey’s report following some 10 inquiries makes grim reading on foot-dragging police and authorities who scorned girls’ stories: why was so little followed up?
Labour has picked report recommendations to act upon: home secretary Yvette Cooper’s order to check prematurely closed cases has already re-opened more than 800. She is asking the National Crime Agency to trace missing perpetrators and toughen local police investigations. She is wiping out child victims’ criminal records for prostitution, while her “Hillsborough law” gives public bodies a duty of candour, with the threat of criminal sanctions if they obstruct investigations. So-called consent by under-16s will not absolve men from rape. Children will get files linking fragmented information from the healthcare system, schools and social workers.
The shadow home secretary, Chris Philp, tells Sky that “hundreds of people in positions of authority over the years deliberately covered this up. I think they are guilty of that criminal offence and frankly should be going to prison.” But who was the minister for crime and policing in the last government? He was. Kemi Badenoch was minister for children. Starmer stands by his accusation that politicians with new zeal for an inquiry are “jumping on a far-right bandwagon”: that it’s only the race element that stirs them. Cases cross Tory and Labour councils, there have been failings all round. Every minute of Starmer’s time as director of public prosecutions has been turned over, but it only shows his record as the rapid accelerator of prosecutions.
The bizarre intervention of Elon Musk ignited this pile-on, with his accusation that Starmer was “deeply complicit in the mass rapes in exchange for votes”, and calling Jess Phillips a “rape genocide apologist”. Musk was fired up by Labour voting down a Badenoch amendment to the children’s wellbeing and schools bill, calling for another inquiry: a move specifically designed to make Labour’s refusal look shifty. Playing the opportunistic Westminster game, hers was a wrecking amendment to kill the whole bill – never mind that it would have knocked out a string of protections for children in care.
Facts matter, but we need more of them. Casey finds that British-Pakistani men are much over-represented in some of the regional statistics that do exist for these crimes – but she also says: “The ethnicity data collected for victims and perpetrators of group-based child sexual exploitation is not sufficient to allow any conclusions to be drawn at the national level.” Both Casey and Cooper regard the figures as badly incomplete; ethnicity data was only recorded in a third of cases in the Hydrant programme, which collates police data on perpetrators and victims.
That’s inadequate, but here’s the latest from the data that has been recorded: 83% of suspects are white, 7% Asian, 5% black. When on a radio phone-in I hear someone say this crime is “predominantly” Pakistani, they are only repeating the kind of misinformation written by Rod Liddle in the Sunday Times this week: he calls grooming abuse “almost exclusively Muslim (and usually Pakistani) men preying almost exclusively on young white girls”.
Indeed, men of Pakistani origin in available statistics about the perpetrators, but Richard Fewkes, the director of Hydrant, says offenders broadly reflect the ethnic mix of the UK population: “In very general terms, what we see across all group-based offending is that no particular ethnicity stands out based on population data.” He may amend that in time, but those on the frontline worry that false facts draw attention away from where most child group sex abuse happens: 57% in institutions, 26% by group sex abusers within families, and 48% by other children.
Be clear what is happening here. Abuse of the most vulnerable people is a matter for us all, but race is what excites the culture warriors. They show little interest in the plight of children in care. In the Tory years, the number of children in care rose from 64,400 in 2010 to 83,630 in the latest figures. Cuts to social workers, health visitors and district nurses, the loss of Sure Start and the axing of child benefits have pushed families over the edge and children into the unkind arms of the state. Can it have been anything but irony when Tories branded their children in care programme “Stable Homes, Built on Love”? The outcomes for these children are dismal and their futures bleak, after multiple placements and rapid ejection at the age of 16, alone into isolated flats. Take just one official figure: 44% of those registered as “children in need” are persistently absent from school. Where are they? In the clutches of bad men offering drugs and fake affection?
The spending review’s extra money for children in care and the children’s bill’s boost for kinship and foster carers will help, with strengthened support for care leavers, and a challenge to the astronomical profits made by private companies offering bad care. But will it be enough to lift the blight that has forever branded these children as no-hopers?
Too early to say. But in the meantime, beware those politicians who are newly exercised by the plight of abused children – but only if the abusers are, say, Pakistani. Beware also the synthetic pity of so many who have until now ignored the state’s appalling treatment of the most vulnerable children in its care. Too many are opportunists seeking grotesque advantage. Theirs are crocodile tears.
 Polly Toynbee is a Guardian columnist
 In the UK, the NSPCC offers support to children on 0800 1111, and adults concerned about a child on 0808 800 5000. The National Association for People Abused in Childhood (Napac) offers support for adult survivors on 0808 801 0331. In the US, call or text the Childhelp abuse hotline on 800-422-4453. In Australia, children, young adults, parents and teachers can contact the Kids Helpline on 1800 55 1800, or Bravehearts on 1800 272 831, and adult survivors can contact Blue Knot Foundation on 1300 657 380. Other sources of help can be found at Child Helplines International
Do you have an opinion on the issues raised in this article? If you would like to submit a response of up to 300 words by email to be considered for publication in our letters section, please click here.
Good morning. As the conflict between Iran and Israel has heated up in the days since Israel’s surprise attack last week, a consensus has emerged that, while Tehran’s nuclear ambitions have been severely compromised, it is all but impossible for Israel to extinguish them permanently without American support.
Nonetheless, Israel hopes that scuttling Iran’s nuclear talks with the US and severely weakening the regime as a military threat will make its gambit worthwhile. And there is another goal that Benjamin Netanyahu appears to believe is possible: regime change.
That phrase, associated as it is with the US-led coalition’s disastrous military adventure in Iraq, is something of a taboo in western capitals. But Netanyahu has been publicly bullish about the end of Ayatollah Khamenei’s rule: “I can tell you this, we have indications that senior leaders in Iran are already packing their bags,” he said on Saturday. “They sense what’s coming.”
In other statements, Netanyahu has been more ambiguous – and there are good reasons to think that Israel’s attacks, extending yesterday to Iran’s state broadcaster, may have the opposite effect. For today’s newsletter, I spoke to Sanam Vakil, director of the Middle East and north Africa programme at Chatham House, about what Israel really wants, and why a sudden transformation in Tehran still looks very unlikely. Here are the headlines.
Grooming gangs | A culture of “blindness, ignorance and prejudice” led to repeated failures over decades to properly investigate cases in which children were abused by grooming gangs, a report has said. Louise Casey said that the authorities had shied away from collecting data on the ethnicity of perpetrators.
Gaza | At least 37 Palestinians were killed on Monday in new shootings near food distribution centres run by private US contractors, local authorities said. The death toll, blamed by witnesses on Israeli troops, was the highest yet reported in the near-daily shootings since the Gaza Humanitarian Foundation began operations three weeks ago.
India | Investigators are preparing to study the pilots’ last words for clues as to the cause of the Air India plane crash, after recovering the cockpit voice recorder from the wreckage. The voice recorder was in the Boeing 787 aircraft’s second black box, which Indian authorities said they had found on Sunday.
Carers | The mother of a teenager with cerebral palsy has demanded an end to the “sickening harassment” of unpaid carers after a significant legal victory against the government. Nicola Green was pursued by the Department for Work and Pensions for more than a year after she was accused of fraudulently claiming nearly £3,000 in carer’s allowance.
UK news | A second person who died in a tandem skydiving incident in Devon has been identified as Adam Harrison, 30, from Bournemouth. Emergency services were called to the area around Dunkeswell aerodrome on Friday. Harrison, who was a tandem skydive instructor, and Belinda Taylor, 48, from Totnes, were confirmed dead at the scene.
In much of the discussion around the “existential threat” that Israel says it faces from Iran, the focus has been on the risk of Tehran developing nuclear weapons. Benjamin Netanyahu said on Sunday that nuclear weapons and Iran’s existing ballistic missiles were the primary targets of the Israeli operation.
But his comments have also left plenty of space to ask whether there is another goal: the removal of the Iranian regime. Israel acted “to not only protect ourselves, but protect the world from this incendiary regime”, he said. And after the first wave of attacks, he called for “the Iranian people to unite around its flag and its historic legacy, by standing up for your freedom from the evil and oppressive regime”.
So is that a serious aim – and what might Iran’s future look like if it happened?
Does Israel want regime change in Iran?
There is little doubt that it “would be a dreamlike scenario for the Israeli political establishment”, Sanam Vakil said. But there is a difference between a dream outcome and a realistic strategic goal. “Since the 7 October attacks, there has been a consensus in Israel that Iran has to be cut down to size. But privately, military and intelligence officials tend to see regime change itself as very hard to achieve.”
What is less clear is what Netanyahu and his political allies really want, or believe to be feasible. “Seeing Iran as the primary security threat and enemy of Israel is something he’s spoken about for two decades,” Vakil said.
His foreign policy has generally focused on containment rather than direct confrontation – but that is partly because previous US presidents, and even Trump in his first term, have been less tolerant of Israeli aggression than the White House now appears. “Since October 7, Israel’s calculations have shifted, and it’s unclear how serious he is about this now. At best, they can try to weaken the regime and let the dominoes fall.”
Some analysts have voiced the view that while it suits Israel to call for regime change now, as a way to destabilise Iran, it is less clear that it would be its preferred outcome in reality. In an X post that she acknowledged presented an “increasingly unpopular opinion”, Maryam Alemzadeh, a professor of Iranian politics at Oxford, argued that Israel “wants a hardliner state who tries to retaliate and make Israel the victim, but fails to inflict much damage”. She said that regime change would ultimately mean that “Iran as the straw man enemy that Israel relies on would disappear”.
Has Israel’s attack changed the views of ordinary Iranians?
On its face, Netanyahu’s appeal to the Iranian people would appear to suggest that he hopes the instability created by Israel’s attacks will stoke the already significant discontent in Iran – and bring about a popular uprising.
In a country of more than 90 million people who have limited opportunities for public expression, it is obviously foolish to claim knowledge of what “the Iranian people” want. “I don’t have a handle on the diversity of views in Iran, and I doubt that Israel does, either,” Vakil said. But it is perhaps more likely that the attacks will have the opposite effect.
The Iranian health ministry claims that 90% of casualties so far are civilians; the Israeli defence minister, Israel Katz, has threatened that “the residents of Tehran will pay the price, and soon” for Iranian retaliation against Israeli residential areas.
“That doesn’t play well in Iran,” Vakil said. “There is, perhaps, an arrogance in asking people who have long been suppressed by their government to come out and topple the regime in response to an Israeli attack.” This piece by William Christou and Deepa Parent, reporting on emergency admissions to a Tehran hospital, gives a sense of how unconvincing a messenger Israel is now likely to appear to many Iranians.
In general, Iranians have not appeared supportive of their government’s “axis of resistance” anti-Israel strategy in recent years. But now there may well be a “rebound effect”, Vakil said: “What Israel and Netanyahu are doing is creating more antipathy among a civilian population that wasn’t very animated about Israel at all.”
Could Israel topple the regime without Iranian civilian support?
Set aside the slim prospects of a sudden popular uprising: Israel might also hope that its attacks will precipitate the regime’s removal by other means. And, Vakil said, the Islamic republic has clearly been weakened by Israel’s attack: “This could certainly be the beginning of a transformation, and you can imagine a domino effect that leads to new people at the top.”
But while Israel’s success in killing senior military leaders has shocked the Iranian establishment, there was little impact on civilian and clerical leadership. In any case, Vakil said, the Iranian state is not so shaky that the loss of individuals would be likely to precipitate a wholesale change. “The symbolism of taking out the top echelon of the IRGC [Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps], which is enshrined in the Iranian constitution as the protector against external and internal threats, is not lost on people. It reveals a system that can not manage its own security.
“It is important and deeply traumatic and embarrassing for the Islamic republic, but it would be a little too triumphant to think that it means the regime is going to collapse as a result.”
There is another problem: the vector of the Israeli assault. The historic evidence of regime change brought about through war suggests that it is rarely the result of aerial attack alone, Vakil said. “Unless the United States suddenly decides that it wants to roll in with boots on the ground, and that it is prepared to engage in a military operation like the one in Iraq, it is very hard to see the Islamic republic being toppled overnight.”
Would the death of Ayatollah Khamenei change that?
On Sunday, Reuters reported a remarkable claim from senior US administration officials: that Israel had a plan to kill the Iranian supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, but that it was vetoed by the White House. If such an operation had been successful – the same report said that Israel believed it had an opportunity to take Khamenei out – the rupture to Iran’s political structures would clearly have been even more profound.
But, Vakil said, Iran is not like Iraq under Saddam Hussein or Libya under Muammar Gaddafi, where so much power was vested in a single person that their removal could be expected to bring about a fundamental change. “Power in Iran is institutionalised, not personalised,” she said. “It would be a massive blow, of course. But the regime would quickly convene and decide what to do.”
One good reason to be sceptical that Khamenei’s removal would be transformative: Iran is already planning for a future without the 86-year-old. Under the pressure of international sanctions, there has been little public discussion of succession, Vakil said: “Part of why the regime had agreed to negotiate with Trump is that they wanted to create the space for that process to play out in the public domain.”
Sign up to First Edition
Our morning email breaks down the key stories of the day, telling you what’s happening and why it matters
after newsletter promotion
What might a new regime look like?
In this thread on X on Saturday, Vakil laid out some scenarios that might unfold, ranging from a sectarian civil war with a power vacuum at the centre to a coup by the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps. A pluralistic democracy does not make the list.
“It’s not readily apparent that it’s a possibility,” she said, as there is no organised opposition in Tehran, while the exiled opposition has few friends at home. “Even among the diaspora, there are so many opinions about what a revolutionary regime change moment should look like. And within the country there is paralysis. You can confidently say that the majority of the country is deeply unhappy with the leadership of the Islamic republic – but I don’t have a sense that Iranians can articulate a coherent view of what they want instead.”
Over the past five days, the UK Aids Memorial Quilt, which commemorates those who have died of the disease, has been viewed by thousands of deeply moved people at London’s Tate Modern – revealing it to be, argues Charlie Porter, one of the most significant artworks of the past 40 years. Alex Needham, acting head of newsletters
Ahead of Friday’s vote on assisted dying, Gordon Brown writes that “there is no effective freedom to choose if the alternative option, the freedom to draw on high-quality end-of-life care, is not available”. For MPs, he argues, that makes the moral duty to vote no inescapable. Archie
The fact that Donald Trump’s military parade turned out to be a washout shouldn’t cheer his opponents too much, writes Moira Doneghan. While we can laugh at his intensely naff attempts to ape strongman dictators, the sinister intent behind them is all too sincere. Alex
If you’ve spent any time on the internet, you’ve probably seen a competition to win a house in a raffle. Kate McCusker talks to some of the people who tried to sell their properties in this unconventional way – with mixed results. Alex
Ross Minor has a singular ambition: to make it possible for blind people to play any video game they want. This Wired profile is a totally fascinating read about accessibility, bloody-minded determination, and the life-changing power of Pokémon. Archie
Football | Pedro Neto and Enzo Fernández both scored and Liam Delap made his Chelsea debut as Chelsea beat Los Angeles FC 2-0 in the Club World Cup. The match was played in front of 22,137 fans in a 75,000 capacity stadium in Atlanta.
Tennis | Dan Evans opened up the men’s tournament at Queen’s Club with his biggest win for more than two years, toppling Frances Tiafoe – the world No 13 – 7-5, 6-2. Cameron Norrie, meanwhile, endured a difficult defeat against the 19-year-old eighth seed Jakub Mensik, losing 7-6 (6), 1-6, 6-1.
Athletics | The father of the double Olympic champion Jakob Ingebrigtsen has been found guilty of hitting the Norwegian runner’s younger sister, Ingrid, with a wet towel, and handed a 15-day suspended sentence. However, Gjert Ingebrigtsen, who coached Jakob to 1500-metre gold at the Tokyo Games in 2021 before an acrimonious split a year later, was acquitted of charges of physical and verbal abuse against his son.
“Israel warns Iranians to flee as deadly air raids continue” says today’s Guardian front page, while the Financial Times has “Israel claims ‘control’ of Tehran skies”. Many other newspapers lead on the Casey report on grooming gangs. “Blindness Ignorance Prejudice Defensiveness” – the four things that failed the victims, says the Metro, while the i paper reports “Generation of girls let down by police, councils and MPs who ignored UK grooming gangs”. “Conspiracy of silence over race doomed thousands of girls to abuse” – that’s the Daily Mail, while the Express has “Let’s ‘uncover a lot of truth’ in sex gangs inquiry”. The Times runs with “Ethnicity ‘brushed aside’ in grooming gang inquiries” while the Mirror insists “Never again”. The Telegraph’s version is “Asylum seekers behind new grooming gang cases”.
Israel’s war with Iran: what does it want?
It has been five days since Israel attacked Iran and the civilian death toll is rising, but its war aims seem to have changed. Julian Borger reports
A bit of good news to remind you that the world’s not all bad
Each one of the millions of parents and children who have enjoyed the books of Julia Donaldson will have their own unique ranking of her works. From The Gruffalo to Superworm, Room on the Broom to Zog, there are almost limitless combinations – but in this piece, Stuart Heritage gives it his best shot at naming the 15 very best.
And whether you agree or disagree with Stuart, here’s a chance to tell the Guardian community team about the most revered Donaldson text in your household.
Sign up here for a weekly roundup of The Upside, sent to you every Sunday
And finally, the Guardian’s puzzles are here to keep you entertained throughout the day. Until tomorrow.
Quick crossword
Cryptic crossword
Wordiply
Donald Trump will leave the G7 summit early and return to Washington DC on Monday, the White House said about an hour after the president said people in Iran’s capital Tehran should evacuate immediately.
Trump’s evacuation warning on Truth Social followed a warning from the Israeli defense forces issued a formal evacuation order to residents of Tehran warning them of the imminent bombing of “military infrastructure”.
Trump was originally supposed to arrive back in the US in the early hours of Wednesday morning, according to people familiar with the matter.
That’s it for today. My colleagues are continuing coverage of the developments in the Middle East here.
Here’s what happened today:
Donald Trump is leaving the G7 Summit early and return to Washington DC on Monday. “You probably see what I see and I have to be back as soon as I can,” Trump said in an apparent nod to the intensifying conflict in the Middle East.
President Trump has directed national security staff to convene in the situation room, both CNN and Fox News are reporting.
Trump says ‘everyone should immediately evacuate Tehran’ and that Iran “should have signed the ‘deal’”.
The Republican-run Senate Finance Committee published a modified text of Trump’s One Big Beautiful Bill Act that proposes Medicaid reforms and a new federal deduction for state and local taxes.
Japan’s Prime Minister Shigeru Ishiba met with President Trump on the sidelines of the G7 meeting on Monday to discuss import auto tariffs Washington imposed on Japan, Reuters is reporting.
European leaders at G7 trying to bring Iran back to negotiating table. But Iran is demanding a joint ceasefire with Israel, while Benjamin Netanyahu, the Israeli prime minister, is resisting the move, and Donald Trump praised the Israeli campaign, suggesting he did not yet believe it was time to relieve the pressure on Iran.
Britain and the United States should finalize “very soon” the implementation of a trade deal agreed last month, Keir Starmer has said ahead of a meeting with Donald Trump in Canada.
The US justice department has asked a federal appeals court to dismiss a lawsuit challenging race-conscious admissions at the US Naval Academy after the elite military school said it changed its policy under Donald Trump. The Naval Academy disclosed in March that it was no longer considering race or ethnicity in its admissions decisions following directives from Trump and defense secretary Pete Hegseth
US House speaker Mike Johnson said he has postponed his planned 22 June trip to Israel to address its parliament, as an escalating battle between Israel and Iran has raised fears of a broader conflict.
The American Bar Association has sued the Trump administration, seeking an order that would bar the White House from pursuing what the ABA called a campaign of intimidation against major law firms. The lawsuit, filed in federal court in Washington DC, said the administration violated the US Constitution in a series of executive orders targeting law firms over their past clients and lawyers they hired.
Minnesota shooting suspect had more than 45 names of elected officials, prosecutors say. Reuters reports that notebooks recovered from Boelter’s car, as well as the home where he had been staying, showed that he had meticulously planned the attacks for some time. He had the names and, in some cases, home addresses for more than 45 elected officials – “mostly or all Democrats” – according to an affidavit from an FBI agent.
The suspect in the assassination of a Minnesota lawmaker and her husband this weekend drove to the homes of two other state politicians before he succeeded in killing one of the targets of his carefully planned attack, federal authorities said today.
A federal judge has said she would issue a brief extension of an order temporarily blocking Donald Trump’s plan to bar foreign nationals from entering the US to study at Harvard University while she decides whether to issue a longer-term injunction.
Trump once again complained about removing Russia from what was once the G8. Russia used to be a part of the exclusive club of major economies but was kicked out following its 2014 annexation of Crimea from Ukraine.
Trump says Iran wants to talk about de-escalating hostilities with Israel, and he advises that they should do so immediately “before it’s too late”.
Iran has been urgently signaling that it seeks an end to hostilities and resumption of talks over its nuclear programs, sending messages to Israel and the US via Arab intermediaries, the Wall Street Journal reports.
The Trump Organization has launched a self-branded mobile service and a $499 smartphone, dubbed Trump Mobile, signaling a new effort to court conservative consumers with a wireless service positioned as an alternative to major telecom providers. The new mobile venture will include call centers based in the United States and phones made in America, the organization said.
Trump aide Alex Pfeiffer said Israeli news reports that indicate US fighter jets are participating in airstrikes on Iran are not true.
“This is not true,” Pfeiffer posted on X. “American forces are maintaining their defensive posture, and that has not changed. We will defend American interests.”
“You probably see what I see and I have to be back as soon as I can,” Trump said in an apparent nod to the intensifying conflict in the Middle East, when asked why he’s cutting short his G7 trip and heading back to Washington tonight.
President Trump has directed national security staff to convene in the situation room, both CNN and Fox News are reporting, citing a White House official. Trump will be leaving the G7 Summit in Canada early.
There are few other details available.
Donald Trump will leave the G7 summit early and return to Washington DC on Monday, the White House said about an hour after the president said people in Iran’s capital Tehran should evacuate immediately.
Trump’s evacuation warning on Truth Social followed a warning from the Israeli defense forces issued a formal evacuation order to residents of Tehran warning them of the imminent bombing of “military infrastructure”.
Trump was originally supposed to arrive back in the US in the early hours of Wednesday morning, according to people familiar with the matter.
The scientist responsible for overseeing the CDC team that collects data on COVID-19 and RSV hospitalizations resigned on Monday.
Dr. Fiona Havers told colleagues in an email that she no longer had confidence the data would be used “objectively or evaluated with appropriate scientific rigor to make evidence-based vaccine policy decisions,” according to Reuters.
She resigned before a planned meeting of a new vaccine panel put in place by Health Secretary Robert Kennedy Jr. after he fired all 17 members of the CDC’s independent vaccine advisory panel. Kennedy also dropped a recommendation to get the Covid shot for healthy children and pregnant women.
A Health and Human Services spokesperson told Reuters that the agency is committed to “gold standard science.”
Trump says everyone should evacuate Tehran and that Iran “should have signed the ‘deal’”.
“I told them to sign,” Trump posted on Truth Social. “What a shame, and waste of human life. IRAN CAN NOT HAVE A NUCLEAR WEAPON. I said it over and over again! Everyone should immediately evacuate Tehran!”
Canadian Prime Minister Mark Carney said he thinks he and Trump will be able to wrap up a new economic and security deal between the US and Canada within 30 days. His office did not say whether that means he had accepted Trump’s earlier emphasis on tariffs.
Defense Secretary Pete Hegseth said he ordered the deployment of additional defensive capabilities to the Middle East over the weekend “to enhance our defensive posture in the region,” according to a statement he posted on X on Monday. He did not disclose what military capabilities he sent to the region.
“Protecting U.S. forces is our top priority and these deployments are intended to enhance our defensive posture in the region,” Hegseth posted.
The Republican-run Senate Finance Committee published a modified text of Trump’s One Big Beautiful Bill Act that proposes Medicaid reforms and a new federal deduction for state and local taxes.
The proposed changes will now be debated by Senate Republicans.
Among the proposed changes are:
An end to the $7,500 tax credit on new electric vehicles 180 days after the law is enacted. And an end to the $4,000 used-vehicle EV tax credit 90 days after the law is passed.
A full phase-out of solar and wind energy tax credits by 2028, but an extension of the incentive for Trump administration-favored hydropower, nuclear and geothermal energy to 2036.
Minnesota senator Ann Rest says she is “so grateful” for the work of law enforcement after learning that the shooting suspect, Vance Boelter, was allegedly parked outside her home before going to former Rep. Melissa Hortman’s home.
“I have been made aware that the shooting suspect was parked near my home early Saturday morning,” Rest said in a statement. “I am so grateful for the heroic work of the New Hope Police Department and its officers. Their quick action saved my life.
I am also thankful for the work of state and local law enforcement to apprehend the suspect before he could take any more lives.
While I am thankful the suspect has been apprehended, I grieve for the loss of Melissa Hortman and her husband Mark, and I am praying for the recovery of John and Yvette Hoffman.”
At the G7 summit, Trump said a new economic deal with Canada was possible but that he wanted tariffs to be a part of it, according to Reuters.
“I have a tariff concept. [Canadian Prime Minister] Mark [Carney] has a different concept ... we’re going to see if we can get to the bottom of it,” Trump said when meeting Carney on the sidelines of a G7 summit in Alberta. “I’m a tariff person.”
Canada is the top supplier of steel and aluminum to the United States and currently faces tariffs imposed by Trump on both metals as well as on auto exports.
“We are in the middle of a discussion - we are not at the end of the discussion. Our position is that we should have no tariffs on Canadian exports to the United States,” Kirsten Hillman, Canada’s ambassador to Washington, told reporters after Carney met Trump.
“We will continue to talk until we find a deal that is the best deal we can achieve for Canada,” Hillman said.
Japan’s Prime Minister Shigeru Ishiba met with President Trump on the sidelines of the G7 meeting on Monday to discuss import auto tariffs Washington imposed on Japan, Reuters is reporting.
Tokyo is urging Washington to drop the tariffs because they threaten to slow Japan’s economy, the Japanese government said.
Ishiba wants Trump to end the 25% auto tariff he imposed on Japanese cars and a 24% reciprocal tariff paused until July 9.
The US government funding cuts will hit a chimpanzee conservation project nurtured by the primatologist Jane Goodall.
USAID has been subjected to swingeing cuts under Donald Trump, with global effects that are still unfolding. Now it has emerged that the agency will withdraw from the Hope Through Action project managed by the Jane Goodall Institute (JGI). USAID had pledged $29.5m (£22m) over five years to the project, which was designed to protect endangered chimpanzees and their habitats in western Tanzania.
Launched in November 2023, the project is intended to protect endangered chimpanzees through reforestation and “community-led methodology” in order to conserve biodiversity conservation and improve local livelihoods.
Its work is built upon Jane Goodall’s research.She “redefined species conservation” by highlighting the importance of cooperation between local people and the natural environment to protect chimpanzees from extinction.
According to JGI figures, chimpanzees have become extinct in three African countries, and overall population numbers have fallen from millions to below 340,000.
Goodall criticised Trump during his first term in office when he signed an executive order dismantling Barack Obama’s clean power plan. She called Trump’s climate agenda “immensely depressing”.
In collaboration with JGI Austria, Ecosia – a Berlin-based search engine that donates 100% of its profits to climate action – has offered $100,000 over the next three years to further JGI Tanzania’s Gombe reforestation project. The donation far from covers the original funding amount, but it is intended to pay for the planting of 360,000 seedlings, work put at risk after the project was defunded.
The director of JGI Austria, Diana Leizinger, said: “We refuse to abandon people and nature. Where hope could have been destroyed, we are helping it grow again.”
An analysis in April by Refugees International found that 98% of USAID’s awards related to the climate had been discontinued.
Sign up to Down to Earth
The planet's most important stories. Get all the week's environment news - the good, the bad and the essential
after newsletter promotion
USAID was approached for comment.
Security preparations for G7 summits normally involve the elite close protection afforded to world leaders, and then a series of of concentric defences against street demonstrations and protests.
Not in the Rockies.
As world leaders gather at the G7 summit in Kananaskis, organizers have also had to factor in the potential threats posed by local wildlife.
Access to Kananaskis Country, one of the region’s main springboards to the rugged foothills and front ranges of the Rockies, has been cut off to all vehicles and air traffic as political elites gather. But officials are rightly worried about the region’s large and unpredictable mammals: moose, cougars, wolves, black bears – and the six dozen grizzlies known to live in the region.
Alberta’s ministry of public safety and emergency services told the Globe and Mail it has a “comprehensive wildlife mitigation strategy” in order to corral world leaders.
The province installed miles of fencing with a “minimum height of eight feet to limit wildlife access”. In areas where animals are often spotted, electric fences have also been installed.
Most people who have spent extended time in the Rocky Mountains have come across a bear. Often, the apex mammals are far more attuned to human presence than vice versa and flee the area before any encounters. Even when startled, bears – both black and grizzly – will scamper off into the forest.
But in recent weeks, charges by a grizzly with two cubs prompted officials to close parts of Kananaskis Country. On 13 June, officials warned visitors to Ole Buck Mountain to be vigilant after a cougar was spotted. A day later, officials closed a portion of the Peter Lougheed trail after a grizzly was spotted feeding on a carcass.
A further potential complication for summit organizers is the love of golf courses shared by both the bears in the region and the US president, Donald Trump. The 600-acre course within Kananaskis Valley is known both for its rugged beauty. And in spring, when food sources in the high country are still inaccessible, open urban environments scattered throughout the wilderness draw in curious bears.
“One of the things that people sometimes forget about is what an incredible environment these golf courses are for all sorts of wildlife,” Darren Robinson, the course’s longtime general manager, told CBC News, adding that cougars and moose have also stalked the greens.
“There’s been days last summer where I literally saw, from in the clubhouse, five different bears. Some black, some grizzlies, some young, some parents. It’s beautiful.”
A tragic incident last year underscored both the persistence of grizzlies – and their vulnerability to humans. Nakoda, a famed white grizzly, easily scaled one of the wildlife fences after she was struck by a car – an injury that later proved fatal.
Her “devastating” death shook park workers, who spent “hundreds upon hundreds of hours” with her over the years, said Saundi Stevens, Parks Canada’s wildlife management specialist with the Lake Louise, Yoho and Kootenay field unit. “Just weeks ago, everyone in our office was actually celebrating her emergence from the den with two new cubs,” Stevens told reporters.
Nakoda’s death was also a stark reminder that despite the fretting over security for world leaders, the biggest risk to the region’s inhabitants will almost always be humans.
It’s been five days since Israel launched attacks on Iran and the war seems to be escalating. Hundreds of people have been killed and Israeli forces have issued an evacuation order for part of Tehran. Iran has managed to evade Israel’s defences with missiles.
The Guardian’s senior international correspondent, Julian Borger, explains to Michael Safi that Israel’s war aims seems to have changed. The first few days were marked by strikes on nuclear facilities and the killing of military officials and nuclear scientists, as Israel said it aimed to prevent Iran from developing nuclear weapons. Now, however, it seems to have expanded into a war of attrition, with regime change a possible goal.
In the meantime, the world is holding its breath to see what Donald Trump will do. Israel launched its attacks while talks were being held by Iran and the US over Tehran’s nuclear programme. Will the US president join forces with Israel or strike a deal with Iran to end the war?
The scientist responsible for overseeing the CDC team that collects data on Covid and RSV hospitalizations resigned on Monday.
Dr Fiona Havers told colleagues in an email that she no longer had confidence the data would be used “objectively or evaluated with appropriate scientific rigor to make evidence-based vaccine policy decisions”, according to Reuters.
She resigned before a planned meeting of a new vaccine panel put in place by Robert Kennedy Jr after he fired all 17 members of the CDC’s independent vaccine advisory panel. Kennedy also dropped a recommendation to get the Covid shot for healthy children and pregnant women.
Havers, leader of the Resp-Net hospitalization surveillance team, did not respond to requests for comment.
Her resignation follows moves by Kennedy, the health secretary, to abruptly fire all 17 members of the CDC’s independent vaccine advisory panel and drop a recommendation for administering Covid shots to healthy children and pregnant women.
Kennedy, who has long sown doubt about the safety and efficacy of vaccines, replaced the advisory board with eight members of his own choosing, some of whom have histories of objecting to Covid shots or vaccines in general.
Havers said in her email that the Covid and RSV data collected by her team had been used in more than 20 peer-reviewed manuscripts and 15 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Reports issued by the CDC.
The newly installed vaccine panel, known as the advisory committee on immunization practices, is expected to meet 25-27 June to vote on the use of Covid-19 boosters and other vaccines by the American public.
A Health and Human Services spokesperson told Reuters that the agency is committed to “gold standard science” and that the vaccine policy will be based on objective data, transparent analysis and evidence.
A key pillar of Dutch maternity services that has led to the Netherlands being hailed as a world leader in postnatal care is under threat, healthcare unions in the country have warned.
The Netherlands has long prided itself on its unique system of kraamzorg (maternity care), whereby a maternity care assistant comes to a new family’s home for eight days after a baby’s birth, caring for mother and infant.
But on Tuesday, five healthcare unions are expected to present a manifesto and petition of almost 15,000 signatures to MPs in The Hague, warning that a shortage of labour and competition from other care jobs have left the system facing crisis.
The petition calls for a guarantee of the future of good kraamzorg for all mothers and newborns in the Netherlands.
The unions want a dedicated ministerial representative and better pay, including for “waiting” time, where care workers have to be available in case babies are born but receive about €11.50 (£9.80) for an eight-hour shift, before tax. A typical contract of 130 hours a month includes 244 to 265 hours on standby, according to the FNV trade union.
“Last year there were 500 families without a maternity care assistant,” said Daniëlle Verveen, a care assistant from Krommenie, near Amsterdam. “And the expectation is that this will increase up to 2034, in just 10 years, to 37,000 families without kraamzorg.”
Marloes Kortland, from the CNV union, said the kraamzorg system of supporting new parents, checking babies’ health and helping with tricky newborn challenges such as breastfeeding was a one-off and deserved to be preserved.
“The Netherlands is the only country that has this care,” she said. “In the countries around us, women stay for much longer in hospital but here, the care for mother and children is taken up straight away by the maternity care assistants.
“But the problem is that there is a shortage of care assistants, the work pressure is ever greater and more people are leaving.
“Kraamzorg demands a lot of flexibility from people because you never know when a baby will be born … and if you have a family yourself, it is very difficult to combine the two.”
Almost one in seven babies are born at home in the Netherlands and, at such a birth, the assistant is present alongside a midwife. In a hospital or maternity unit birth, women are typically discharged within hours and the care worker then visits every day to monitor mother and baby. The system, mostly paid for through health insurance, offers between 24 and 80 hours of care.
But in periods such as the summer holiday it is creaking at the seams, said GreenLeft MP and former midwife Elke Slagt-Tichelman.
“If there’s a peak with births in a region, it can be exhausting for the maternity care assistants to get the schedule organised, and sometimes parents get less assistance,” she said.
Although vital, she added, the job of maternity care assistant was challenging and “not attractive” from a remunerative point of view. “Like taking care of the elderly, it is a really underpaid job,” she said.
But Verveen – who said that in three years she had saved a 24-hour-old girl from choking and helped 200 families – said the profession had a value far beyond income.
“There is something magical about life as a maternity carer,” she said. “You help a family start up a new life.”
As Donald Trump considers a direct intervention in Israel’s conflict with Iran, another war has broken out in Washington between conservative hawks, calling for immediate US strikes on uranium enrichment facilities, and Maga isolationists, who are demanding Trump stick to his campaign pledge not to involve the US in new overseas wars.
At stake is whether the US could target the mountain redoubt that is home to the Fordow fuel enrichment plant, a key uranium enrichment site hidden 80 to 90 metres underground that cannot be targeted directly by Israeli jets – although they can attack some of the infrastructure that allows the plant to operate.
A direct strike would require the US Air Force’s 30,000-pound class GBU-57/B massive ordinance penetrators and the US B-2 Stealth Bombers capable of carrying them, making Washington’s sign-on a key goal for Israeli officials.
“Mr Trump posted on social media Sunday that ‘we can easily get a deal done’ to end the war,” read a Wall Street Journal editorial this week. “But that prospect will be more likely if he helps Israel finish the military job.
“If Mr Trump won’t help on Fordow, Israel will need more time to achieve its strategic goals,” it went on. “A neutral US means a longer war.”
Over the weekend, the US began to move airborne refuelling tankers to Europe and ordered a second carrier group, the USS Nimitz, to the Middle East, part of preparations experts say would be necessary for the strike. The US does not currently have B-2 bombers stationed in the region. A deployment of six stealth bombers returned from the Diego Garcia airbase in the Indian Ocean to the US in May.
“Trump’s assembling the forces necessary to do the Fordow strike,” wrote Daniel Shapiro, a former Pentagon official for Middle Eastern affairs and ex-ambassador to Israel. “Tankers, fighters, and the second carrier. Doesn’t mean he has made the decision to do it but he’s giving himself the option. Can that be leveraged to get a major Iranian concession that pre-empts the need for it?”
Senior White House officials have told US media that the refuelling tankers and other assets have been sent to Europe to station them closer to the Middle East and to give Trump “more options”.
As US forces head to the region, Trump increased pressure on the Iranian government to cut a deal. On Monday, he posted that Iran “should have signed the deal I told them to sign” and reiterated that “IRAN CAN NOT HAVE A NUCLEAR WEAPON”.
“Everyone should immediately evacuate Tehran!” he added, referring to a city of about 10 million people.
Other US officials have sought to dampen speculation that the US is planning for an offensive strike on Iran.
“Over the weekend, I directed the deployment of additional capabilities to the United States Central Command Area of Responsibility,” said the secretary of defense, Pete Hegseth, in a statement. “Protecting US forces is our top priority and these deployments are intended to enhance our defensive posture in there region.”
Reports have suggested that Trump is seeking last-minute talks this week between Iran and his Middle East envoy Steve Witkoff.
But the escalating conflict – and America’s possible role in it – has already led to a schism among vocal Trump supporters.
Some of Trump’s most powerful allies, including his vice-president, JD Vance, have called for the US to restrain itself from sending its troops to fight wars overseas. Powerful pundits like Tucker Carlson have condemned the potential for US involvement in a war in Iran.
Speaking on a podcast, Carlson called out fellow media personalities as “warmongers” and said that description “would include anyone who’s calling Donald Trump today to demand airstrikes and other direct US military involvement in a war with Iran”.
Trump took to social media to shout down Carlson, an influential ally and media personality who played an important role in popularising his America First platform.
“Somebody please explain to kooky Tucker Carlson that IRAN CAN NEVER HAVE A NUCLEAR WEAPON,” Trump shot back.
The schism among Trump officials also runs through the Pentagon. Elbridge Colby, the undersecretary of defense for policy, is among the most prominent of a group of “prioritisers” who had hoped to focus US resources away from Europe and the Middle East towards the growing threat from China. The Pentagon has denied there are any disagreements on policy within the department.
Those close to the group have said that traditional republicans such as Senator Tom Cotton, as well as senior Pentagon officials like Centcom Gen Michael Erik Kurilla, have continued to impress upon Trump the need for a more hawkish Iran policy.
Kurilla was seen as especially influential in pushing for “Operation Rough Rider”, the seven-week US campaign against the Houthis that was abruptly concluded after burning through more than $1bn, thousands of bombs and missiles, seven UAVs that were shot down and two fighter jets that sank after falling off carriers.
Asked last week by the House armed services chair, Mike Rogers, whether US Central Command (Centcom) was prepared to “respond with overwhelming force to prevent a nuclear-armed Iran”, Kurilla responded: “Yes … I have provided the secretary of defense and the president a wide range of options.”
With Trump rushing back to Washington from a G7 meeting in Canada to an emergency national security council meeting, the potential for a strike against Iran appeared as high as at any time since the beginning of the crisis.
“What’s happening here is some of the isolationist movement led by Tucker Carlson and Steve Bannon are distressed we may be helping the Israelis defeat the Iranians,” Mitch McConnell, the former Senate Republican leader, told CNN. “I would say it’s been kind of a bad week for the isolationists.”
Israeli forces have issued an evacuation order to residents of a large part of Tehran, warning them of the imminent bombing of “military infrastructure” in the area in a social media post very similar to those regularly directed at Palestinians in Gaza over the past 20 months.
The post on Monday on X was from the account of the Israel Defense Forces’ Arabic spokesperson, Col Avichay Adraee, and is a further sign of the evolving nature of the Israeli campaign against Iran, which began with attacks on air defences, nuclear sites and the military chain of command, but appears to have drifted towards a war of attrition focused on Iran’s oil and gas industry and on the capital.
In another sign of the changing targets of the Israeli offensive, Iran’s state TV announced on Monday evening during a live transmission that it was under attack.
The sound of an explosion could be heard, and the news presenter hurried off camera as dust and debris appeared in the studio. Cries of “Allahu Akbar” or “God is greatest” could be heard off-screen and the broadcast abruptly switched to pre-recorded programming. Live programming resumed some time later.
Adraee’s online post included a map depicting a significant area of the third district in northern Tehran shaded in red in the same manner he has presented evacuation orders for Palestinians.
“Dear citizens, for your safety, please leave the described area in the 3rd district of Tehran immediately,” the message said in Farsi.
“In the coming hours, the Israeli army will attack the military infrastructure of the Iranian regime in this area, as it has done in recent days in Tehran. Your presence in this area endangers your life.”
Later on Monday, the US president, Donald Trump, urged everyone to immediately evacuate Tehran, and reiterated that Iran should have signed a nuclear deal with the US.
“IRAN CAN NOT HAVE A NUCLEAR WEAPON. I said it over and over again! Everyone should immediately evacuate Tehran!” he said in a post on Truth Social.
Speaking to personnel at Tel Nof air force base, the Israeli prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, confirmed the evacuation orders.
“The Israeli air force controls the skies over Tehran. This changes the entire campaign,” he said.
“When we control the skies over Tehran, we strike regime targets, as opposed to the criminal Iranian regime which targets our civilians and comes to kill women and children. We tell the people of Tehran to evacuate, and we act.”
Netanyahu later said killing Iran’s supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Hosseini Khamenei, would “end the conflict” in what would be another ominous escalation.
After the surprise Israeli attack on Friday morning, Iran has carried out retaliatory missile strikes on Israeli cities, focusing on the most populated areas between Tel Aviv and the port of Haifa.
Both sides have targeted each other’s oil and gas facilities, increasing the threat of environmental disaster, and explosions were reported on Monday near oil refineries in southern Tehran.
Earlier on Monday, Iran threatened to leave the nuclear non-proliferation treaty (NPT) as Israeli bombing raids entered a fourth day, underlining the conflict’s potential to trigger a broader war and Tehran’s race to construct a nuclear weapon.
The human cost of the war continued to escalate with both sides broadening their range of targets, as G7 leaders convened in the Canadian Rockies with no clear plan to end the conflict. There were reports on Monday that Trump was refusing to sign a joint statement calling for the conflict to be scaled down.
“They should talk, and they should talk immediately,” Trump said of Tehran during the summit. “I’d say Iran is not winning this war.”
The Wall Street Journal reported on Monday that Iran was sending a message to Israel and the US through Arab intermediaries that it was seeking a cessation of hostilities and a resumption of talks on its nuclear programme.
The same report, however, said its stance was that it would only go back to the table if Israel halted its offensive. There was no sign on Monday of Israel contemplating a pause.
Iran’s health ministry said 224 people in Iran had been killed by Israeli attacks, 90% of them civilian, and more than 1,400 had been injured. Israel’s defence minister, meanwhile, threatened further bombing strikes on Tehran, where an exodus of residents has been reported, clogging roads out of the capital.
The Iranian Red Crescent said that three of its rescuers were killed in an Israeli airstrike in northwest Tehran, adding: “This incident is not only a crime against international humanitarian law but also a blatant attack on humanity and morality.”
In Israel, at least 23 civilians have been killed in Iran’s retaliatory missile strikes since Israel’s initial surprise attack on Friday morning, and nearly 600 have been injured, according to official sources.
The Iranian foreign ministry spokesperson, Esmaeil Baghaei, announced on Monday that Iran’s parliament, the Majlis, was preparing a bill that would withdraw the country from the 1968 NPT agreement, which obliges it to forego nuclear weapons and to undergo international inspections to verify compliance. Baghaei added that Tehran remained opposed to the development of weapons of mass destruction.
The country’s president, Masoud Pezeshkian, also insisted that Iran did not intend to develop nuclear weapons but would pursue its right to nuclear energy and research. He pointed out that Ali Khamenei, had issued a religious edict against weapons of mass destruction.
Israel is the only Middle East state with nuclear weapons and did not sign the NPT, but has never formally acknowledged its arsenal.
It is seeking to maintain its monopoly with airstrikes against Iranian nuclear facilities, claiming that Tehran was close to building a bomb. Previous assessments by US intelligence and the UN nuclear watchdog found no evidence that Iran had begun work on assembling a nuclear weapon.
Israeli critics of the offensive say it cannot destroy Iran’s reserve of nuclear knowhow – though Israel has targeted Iranian nuclear scientists, claiming to have killed 14 – and could push the leadership into ordering the assembly of nuclear warheads.
Rafael Grossi, the head of the International Atomic Energy Agency, told the BBC it was very likely all the roughly 15,000 centrifuges at Iran’s biggest uranium enrichment plant at Natanz had been badly damaged or destroyed because of a power cut caused by an Israeli strike.
But he said there had been very limited or no damage at the separate Fordow plant.
There were reports on Monday of Israeli strikes on the Tehran headquarters of the Revolutionary Guards al-Quds force, an expeditionary arm deployed in foreign wars.
Despite Israeli claims to have air superiority over much of Iran, Iranian forces have still been able to launch ballistic missiles from their territory and some continue to evade Israel’s multi-layered air defences. Israel Defense Forces officials estimate that it is has been able to intercept 80-90% of Iran’s missiles, with 5-10% hitting actual residential areas.
Eight more Israelis were killed overnight by Iranian missile strikes, including four in Petah Tikva where a missile hit an apartment block. Three people died from blasts in Haifa and an elderly man was killed when his home collapsed from the shockwave from an explosion in Bnei Brak, east of Tel Aviv.
Iran’s Revolutionary Guards claimed to have begun “more powerful and deadly” strikes and to have found a way of causing confusion in Israeli air defence systems. There was no immediate way of independently verifying the claim.
US forces have so far helped Israel intercept Iranian missiles, but have not taken part, at least overtly, in offensive bombing operations. On Monday, however, Reuters quoted two unnamed US officials as saying the movement of more than 30 military refuelling aircraft to Europe was intended to give Trump more options in the Middle East. Such tankers allow warplanes to refuel in mid-air and enable more sorties a day in wartime.
The US defence secretary, Pete Hegseth, said on Monday he had ordered the deployment of additional defensive capabilities to the Middle East, but did not disclose what military capabilities he sent to the region.
As Tehran residents evacuated the capital in increasing numbers, Israel’s defence minister, Israel Katz, threatened to make Tehranis “pay the price” for Ali Khamenei’s decision to keep firing missiles at Israel in retaliation for the Israeli attack.
The Iranian state-backed news agency Fars reported that the authorities had executed a man found guilty of spying for Israel’s intelligence agency, the Mossad. It was the third execution of an alleged spy in recent weeks.
Keir Starmer and Donald Trump have signed off a UK-US trade deal at the G7 summit in Canada, with the US president saying Britain would have protection against future tariffs “because I like them”.
The two leaders presented the deal, which covers aerospace and the auto sector, at the G7 venue in Kananaskis, Alberta.
When reporters asked about steel, Trump said: “We’re going to let you have that information in a little while.”
Under details released by the Department for Business and Trade, the UK aerospace sector will face no tariffs at all from the US, while the auto industry will have 10% tariffs, down from 25%.
The steel industry still faces 25% tariffs for now, although this is less than the US’s global rate of 50% on steel and aluminium. The UK business department said the two leaders had pledged to “make progress towards 0% tariffs on core steel products as agreed”.
However, the US executive order implementing the deal highlighted a possible hiccup over steel tariffs. The US still wants assurances about the Chinese owners of British Steel.
In a paragraph setting out a future move to “most-favoured-nation rates for steel and aluminum articles”, the order says the UK has “committed to working to meet American requirements on the security of the supply chains of steel and aluminum products intended for export to the United States and on the nature of ownership of relevant production facilities”.
This would seem to refer to US worries about Jingye Group, which owns British Steel even though the UK government took control of the company in April to stop Jingye closing its Scunthorpe plant. Trump’s administration wants assurances that Jingye does not use British Steel as a way to circumvent US tariffs.
A full version of the deal first outlined in May had been seen as imminent, but Downing Street will be particularly happy to have it finalised at the summit, with full endorsement from a cheerful Trump – even if he did wrongly say the deal was with the EU.
“I just signed it, and it’s done. And so we have our trade agreement with the European Union, and it’s a fair deal for both, and it produces a lot of jobs, a lot of income,” Trump said.
“And we have many, many other ones coming. But you see, the level of enthusiasm is very good, but the relationship that we have is fantastic.”
Sign up to Headlines UK
Get the day’s headlines and highlights emailed direct to you every morning
after newsletter promotion
As has been his habit in recent meetings with Starmer, the mercurial president was warm in his praise for a fellow leader who is not a political soulmate. “We’re very longtime partners and allies and friends, and we’ve become friends in a short period of time. He’s slightly more liberal than I am,” Trump joked at one point.
Asked if the UK was now protected from future tariffs, Trump said: “The UK is very well protected. You know why? Because I like them – that’s their ultimate protection.”
He added: “The prime minister has done a great job. I want to just tell that to the people of the United Kingdom. He’s done a very, very good job. He’s done what other people, they’ve been talking about this deal for six years, and he’s done what they haven’t been able to do. So he’s done really a very good job.”
The comments came just before the pair met for talks at the G7 event, where Starmer was poised to push the US president for new sanctions against Russia and to help end the war between Iran and Israel.
In a separate announcement late on Monday, Downing Street said it expected further sanctions on Moscow to be set out at the summit, seeking to “ratchet up pressure until Russia is ready to commit to a full and unconditional ceasefire”. No 10 said there would be more details on Tuesday.
Donald Trump will return early to Washington on Monday from the G7 summit because of events in the Middle East, US officials said, confronted by an escalating Iran-Israel conflict and the possibility of US involvement hanging in the balance.
The White House press secretary Karoline Leavitt said that Trump would participate in the G7 family photo and would dine with leaders at the summit in Alberta, Canada, before travelling back a day ahead of schedule.
Trump’s abrupt change in plans comes after a series of developments in the Israel-Iran conflict and a Truth Social post by the president warning residents in Iran’s capital of Tehran to immediately evacuate.
The ominous warning from Trump followed an evacuation order issued earlier in the day by Israeli forces telling residents in large parts of Tehran to evacuate ahead of imminent bombing of “military infrastructure”.
Trump’s early departure is a blow to G7 organizers who had sought to discuss the conflict in the Middle East and were hoping for the US to be a signatory to a statement calling on both sides to de-escalate.
A draft of the statement said Iran can never possess a nuclear weapon, Israel has a right to defend itself and Iran’s nuclear weapons program is subject to a negotiated deal, according to a person familiar with the matter.
“AMERICA FIRST means many GREAT things, including the fact that, IRAN CAN NOT HAVE A NUCLEAR WEAPON. MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!!!” Trump said in a post after his schedule change was announced.
Trump also suggested he was coming under more pressure to mediate in the conflict.
“They want to make a deal and as soon as I leave here, we’re going to be doing something. But I have to leave here,” Trump said, adding: “It’s always better to talk in person.”
The rapid succession of events raised concerns in Washington about the possibility of the US being dragged into the conflict or its potential to trigger a broader war in the region.
Israel’s bombing runs started with attacks on air defenses, nuclear sites and the military chain of command. But four days into the campaign, it appears to have drifted into war of attrition.
And in another ominous escalation on Monday, the Israeli prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, also said that killing Iran’s supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Hosseini Khamenei, would “end the conflict”.
After the surprise Israeli attack on Friday, Iran has carried out retaliatory missile strikes on Israeli cities, focusing on the most populated areas between Tel Aviv and the port of Haifa, and threatened to leave the nuclear non-proliferation treaty.
The US has not been directly involved in the conflict, but on Monday, the USS Nimitz aircraft carrier strike group was rerouted from the South China Sea to the Middle East, a move that put two US carriers in the region.
The Nimitz is likely to reach the Middle East later this week and join the USS Carl Vinson carrier strike group, a person familiar with the matter said.
Two destroyers in the Mediterranean have also been moved closer to Israel in recent days to help protect US assets in the region. Dozens of air force refuelling aircraft were also deployed from the US to Europe over the weekend to support operations in the Middle East.
The Iranian missile blew the door off the White City museum celebrating Bauhaus Tel Aviv, and shattered the windows of the Quick coffee shop down the road, where cinnamon buns and salads sat in the display case ready for a relaxed summer day that would never come.
In the ultra-orthodox neighbourhood of Bnei Bark another missile collapsed a school, killing an 80-year-old man. A third hit partway up a high-rise tower in manicured, suburban Petah Tikva, destroying a reinforced safe room and killing the family inside.
Destruction landed randomly across Israel’s biggest metropolitan area on Sunday, the third night of Iranian missile attacks, crossing social, economic and religious divides to kill eight people, injure more than 100 and leave many more homeless.
After Israel launched the war with attacks on Iranian military commanders and the assassinations of top nuclear scientists early on Friday morning, Iran vowed revenge.
Since then more than 20 missiles have evaded sophisticated defences to cause devastation unprecedented in contemporary Israel. While some appear to have targeted strategic sites, many have landed in residential areas far from known military installations.
They have brought down apartment blocks and a school, and damaged synagogues, museums, shops and cafes. Entire buildings have collapsed at the worst-hit sites, with severe damage over a radius of hundreds of metres.
“I’m so tired, now I just want to leave,” said Avital, 72, on Monday morning. She was sitting outside the tower in Petah Tikva that had been home for more than a decade, waiting for rescue workers to bring down her clothes and medicine from their 14th storey apartment.
“My husband wanted to go out for a bit on Sunday, but I said: ‘No, let’s stay here where its safe.’ Well, what kind of safety was that?” Their home looks out on the strike site, a gaping hole in the neighbouring block, where four people were killed.
Avital is now moving to a hotel to wait for news on whether their building can be repaired, and hopes that the war will end soon. “This is our country; we don’t have anywhere else to go”.
At the start of the war, the government urged people to shelter in communal shelters or individual safe rooms – a legal requirement in all new builds in recent years – when the air raid sirens sound.
A sophisticated multi-layer warning system puts Israelis on notice to stay by a “protected area” when imminent attacks are expected, and usually gives an early alert 10 minutes or more before the missile is expected to land.
But in Petah Tikva, one safe room was taken out by a direct hit, leaving the government scrambling to reassure people that this was extremely rare, fearing they might shift to sheltering in basements or stairwells instead, which leave people vulnerable in other ways. Some have been killed by collapsing buildings, blast waves from the explosion, or smoke inhalation from fires sparked by the impact.
A quarter of Israelis do not have the option of safe rooms, state ombudsman Matanyahu Englman admitted on a visit to Bat Yam, where another missile took down part of a high rise, and left buildings unsafe for several blocks around.
“This is quite a large proportion of the population,” he said. “We have found some deficiencies and raised recommendation for the government to do more. Beside fighting enemies outside the country we have to take care of civilians.
The area hit in central Tel Aviv is one of them, a district mostly made up of historic low-rise buildings from the 1930s. Few have safe rooms.
Liad Scharf, 48, was sheltering in his basement when the missile hit, sending chunks of plaster showering down, and cracks through the walls of his bedroom upstairs.
He is worried that the war will stop his daughters coming to visit over the summer, but the damage at home is “just money”.
The apartment can be patched up, said Scharf, who backs the government’s decision to attack Iran, despite the heavy personal and national price. Israel has endured multiple wars, and is surrounded by enemies who will destroy it if the country doesn’t fight, he said.
“This is not our first rodeo. Or our second, or our third or our fourth,” he said. “We are strong, and we have to do what’s necessary.”
Death tolls in both Tehran and Israel are likely to mount. Military officials have admitted that the scale of Iran’s nightly barrages, with dozens of missiles sent in multiple waves, means that even its sophisticated air defence systems cannot stop all the warheads.
At the start of the war Israel estimated Iran had about 2,000 missiles. Many have been destroyed, and nearly 300 fired at Israel, but it is still thought to have an arsenal on a scale that dwarfs previous threats to the country.
Rockets from Hezbollah or Hamas are mostly blocked by the Iron Dome defence system and the few that do land cannot rip apart whole blocks. Yemen’s Houthis and Iraq, in the years under dictator Saddam Hussein, have also fired ballistic missiles at Israel, but they each deployed a few dozen warheads in total.
Analysts also warn that Israel’s stockpiles of expensive air defence missiles are not unlimited, and while inventories are a closely guarded military secret, if they are depleted too fast it could make the country even more vulnerable.
There is also likely to be economic pain from the war. The economy is partially shut down, with large gatherings of people banned, many businesses closed, and all flights cancelled, making it hard to enter or leave the country.
But for now a large portion of the country see the losses of lives, homes, earnings and much else, as a painful but necessary sacrifice for the country’s future.
“The diplomatic solutions were not working out,” said real estate agent Ofek, 24, who had come to check on his grandfather, who lives just a couple of blocks from the Bat Yam site. “I guess this is the price we have to pay to be safe.”
Europe should not restart buying Russian gas even if there is peace in Ukraine, according to the EU’s energy commissioner, Dan Jorgensen. The European Commission aims to ban EU Russian gas and liquefied natural gas (LNG) imports by the end of 2027. Jorgensen said “in my view if there is peace in Ukraine we should still not restart Russian gas imports”, Reuters news agency reported.
Jorgensen said EU countries and companies would not be offered compensation but would be legally safe in breaking their contracts with Russia. “We have a very clear opinion from the legal team of the commission, stating that since this will be a prohibition, a ban, the companies will not get into legal problems. This a force majeure,” said Jorgensen, meaning the ban was outside their control.
The death toll stood at 14 and seemed likely to rise on Tuesday morning after a Russian mass drone attack struck several districts of Kyiv. “Enemy drones are coming over the city from three directions. There is also the danger of missiles,” posted the mayor, Vitali Klitschko. One strike damaged the top floor of an apartment block and other areas in the Solomianskyi district near the city centre. Rescue teams went to strikes in several other districts of Kyiv. At least 55 people were injured in one of the deadliest nights in the Ukrainian capital since the full-scale war began in spring 2022, Shaun Walker writes from Kyiv.
As air defences were activated, Andriy Yermak, chief of staff to Volodymyr Zelenskyy, the Ukrainian president, said: “Russia is continuing its war on civilians.” Tymur Tkachenko, head of the city’s military administration, said there was a fire in Darnytskyi district on the eastern edge of the capital. “This is a very difficult night,” he wrote. In Russia, the defence military said 51 Ukrainian drones attacked the border Belgorod region over three and a half hours late on Monday.
North Korean troops have sustained more than 6,000 casualties fighting for Russia against Ukraine – more than half of the about 11,000 soldiers initially sent to the Kursk region by Kim Jong-un’s regime, according to the British defence ministry.
Zelenskyy on Monday said that he wanted to discuss buying US weapons with Donald Trump, adding that getting them for free was not on the agenda. Zelenskyy was in Vienna before travelling to the G7 summit in Canada; however, Trump left the G7 on Monday early, citing the situation in the Middle East. Earlier, Zelenskyy said he wanted to discuss with Trump “the defence package that Ukraine is ready to buy”.
“I can’t imagine and I don’t want to imagine … how to live without and fight without the help of the United States,” Zelenskyy continued. “I think we all have to work to make sure that the alliance between America and Europe doesn’t fall apart.” Zelenskyy said he viewed the G7 summit as a “very important” opportunity to see “what kind of pressure we can all exert to stop [Vladimir] Putin, so that he stops the fire, stops the war … we will discuss frozen Russian assets with the leaders, and we will also discuss sanctions”.
Trump has shied away from imposing further sanctions on Russia – on Monday saying “I’m waiting to see whether or not a deal is signed”, of which there has been no sign. He also wants Russia readmitted to the G7. Trump said over two weeks ago that he would know in about two weeks whether Putin is “tapping him along” and not genuine about peace negotiations.
The Guardian’s Russian affairs reporter, Pjotr Sauer, says Ukraine’s daring Operation Spiderweb will make military commanders across the world rethink national security. On 1 June, Ukraine launched a daring attack on Russian air bases, inflicting billions of dollars of damage to warplanes using inexpensive drones smuggled in on top of lorries.
Russia has returned 1,245 more bodies to Ukraine, Kyiv said on Monday, the final stage of a deal to repatriate more than 6,000 dead Ukrainian soldiers. Russia and Ukraine reached an agreement on a large-scale exchange of prisoners and the bodies of killed soldiers – the only visible result from two rounds of direct talks in the Turkish city of Istanbul. The Ukrainian defence minister, Rustem Umerov, said Kyiv had received more than 6,000 bodies in total over the past week.
The Ukrainian interior minister, Igor Klymenko, accused Russia of “deliberately complicating the identification process … Bodies are returned in an extremely mutilated state, parts of [the same] bodies are in different bags,” he said, and Ukraine also “received bodies of Russian soldiers mixed with those of Ukrainians”.
Zelenskyy said Moscow had offered to swap Ukrainian children it has kidnapped for Russian soldiers held prisoner by Ukraine. “Russians proposed this: we give them their soldiers, and they give us children,” he said. “It is simply beyond comprehension and beyond international law, but it is in their spirit,” he added, calling the idea “madness”. Hundreds of children have been forcibly taken by Russia during its invasion, and Ukrainian negotiators handed a list of some of their names to Moscow’s delegation at the talks in Istanbul.
In Vienna, Zelenskyy said that he and the Austrian president, Alexander Van der Bellen, spoke about an eventual Austrian contribution to Ukraine’s postwar reconstruction, including clearing landmines, energy cooperation and food security. The Austrian president said his country was militarily neutral but “it is not so politically”. Austria had good relations with Russia before the invasion of Ukraine, and still has some economic links, but ties have deteriorated over the past three years. Austria’s far-right opposition FPOe party, which is polling first in voter surveys, criticised Zelenskyy’s visit.
Social media has overtaken television as a source of news in the US for the first time, according to a comprehensive analysis of media consumption confirming the rapid rise of “news influencers”.
In a watershed moment for the US media, 54% of Americans said they received news from social media, according to the research carried out after President Trump’s second inauguration. Half said they sourced news from the once all-powerful TV networks.
The accelerating global shift towards social media and video platforms is laid bare in a major study by the Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism, which surveyed almost 100,000 news consumers worldwide.
It reveals a further diminishing of the influence of traditional news organisations, with more people heading to podcasters, YouTubers and TikTokers. The authors warned it is allowing populist politicians such as Trump and Argentina’s Javier Milei to bypass the scrutiny of the transitional media in favour of new, online networks.
The role of news influencers, who use their personal brand to win an online following, is growing, led by the extraordinary impact of the podcaster Joe Rogan during last year’s US presidential election.
One-fifth (22%) of those contacted in the US said they came across news or commentary from Rogan in the week after the presidential inauguration, including a disproportionate number of young men, a group traditional media struggles to reach.
News influencers on YouTube, Instagram and TikTok are also finding large audiences in India, Brazil, Indonesia and Thailand, which have younger populations that are heavy social media users.
Meanwhile, Elon Musk’s X has seen a major shift to the right among its users, according to the analysis. Musk’s takeover of the site has been followed by a 50% increase among right-leaning users, from 10% of the group in 2021 to 15% this year. There has been a corresponding fall in left-leaning users, from 17% to 14% over the same period, as liberals have abandoned the platform.
The findings confirm the huge changes taking place in news consumption worldwide. “The rise of social video and personality-driven news represents another significant challenge for traditional publishers that are struggling to adapt their content and tone to these very different environments,” said Nic Newman, a founding member of the BBC News website and the study’s lead author.
“Online video may be a good way to engage younger audiences, but there is very little commercial upside for publishers, with most news consumption taking place via platforms rather than owned and operated news websites. Publishers also face a loss of influence, with populist politicians increasingly looking to bypass scrutiny by working with sympathetic influencers instead.”
A decade ago, just two online networks were delivering news content to more than 10% of the report’s global sample. That has now grown to six.
Facebook reaches more than a third (36%), while YouTube is not far behind (30%). Instagram and WhatsApp are used by around a fifth for news content, while 16% turn to TikTok and 12% still receive news from X.
There are concerns that truth will suffer. Overall, 58% of the populations studied remain worried about their ability to tell what is true from what is false online. Concern is highest in Africa (73%) and the US (73%).
The phenomenon of news avoidance continues to rise as users restrict the amount they consume, complaining about feeling overwhelmed by a gloomy news agenda. Four in 10 people in the study’s global sample said they sometimes or often avoid the news – up from 29% in 2017 – the joint highest figure ever recorded.
The UK has one of the highest proportions of news avoiders, where 46% say they sometimes or often avoid the news.
In another major change on the horizon, young people are already turning to artificial intelligence chatbots such as ChatGPT or Google’s Gemini for news. It poses a serious risk to news companies as users may receive all the information they need through a chatbot without ever visiting the original source of the story.
The numbers using chatbots for news are still relatively small overall, but are higher with under-35s at 12% of the group. Across all the countries involved in the study, people expect AI will make the news cheaper and more up-to-date but less transparent, less accurate and less trustworthy.
Iran’s key nuclear sites have not suffered any further damage since Friday, the first day of Israel’s attack on the country, the head of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) announced at a governors’ meeting on Monday.
Rafael Grossi, the director general of the nuclear watchdog, said while buildings above ground at Iran’s principal uranium enrichment site at Natanz had been destroyed, strategic locations underground had not been struck.
“There has been no additional damage at the Natanz fuel enrichment plant site since the Friday attack,” Grossi said. “There has been no indication of a physical attack on the underground cascade hall containing part of the pilot fuel enrichment plant and the main fuel enrichment plant.”
That contrasts with claims made by Israel’s military on Friday after its air force bombed the Nantaz site that said the underground area of the site was damaged.
Experts from the Royal United Services Institute thinktank, Darya Dolzikova​ and Matthew Savill, said while it was not clear how much damage Israel had inflicted on Iran’s nuclear programme, “the attacks carried out thus far are not sufficient to deal a decisive blow”.
A second Iranian enrichment site, at Fordow, which is hidden 80 to 90 metres below a mountain, is not thought to have been affected, Grossi said in the update, though it had been attacked by Israel on Friday evening. “No damage has been seen,” the director general said.
Israel launched its attack on Iran on Friday to pre-empt a secret Iranian programme to build a nuclear bomb, Israel’s prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, said, which would require uranium to be enriched to 90% to produce warheads.
The country runs two principal enrichment sites, at Natanz and Fordow, and has already accumulated 408.6kg of 60%-enriched uranium – enough, the regulator said last week, to make nine nuclear bombs if the enrichment continued.
Another expert, David Albright from the Institute for Science and International Security, said on Sunday that if Fordow alone remained intact and Iran had access to its stock of 60%-enriched uranium, it may be possible to produce enough weapons-grade uranium for “nine nuclear weapons by the end of the first month” after production is stepped up.
The Fordow site is generally considered to have been built so deep below ground that it could be destroyed only by US GBU 57/B bunker buster bombs, which are so heavy they can only be launched from B-2 bombers.
There are two facilities at Natanz. The main site, the fuel enrichment plant, is estimated to be between 8 and 12 metres below ground. Military analysts believe it can withstand bombing with all but the heaviest weapons available to Israel, and to destroy it would likely require multiple strikes with the 1.8-tonne Rocks missile or 1.6-tonne Air Lora missiles.
A lesser site, the pilot fuel enrichment plant, was based partly overground and vulnerable to attack. Satellite imagery confirms there is serious damage to buildings overground, including the pilot fuel enrichment plant – but it is not possible to assess the impact to the underground hall from the imagery above.
Electricity infrastructure – a sub-station and power supplies had also been destroyed at the Natanz site, Grossi said, which is also confirmed by satellite imagery – and the resulting “loss of power to the cascade hall may have damaged the centrifuges there”.
Naturally occurring uranium contains only 0.7% of the fissile isotope uranium 235. It has to be enriched to 90% uranium 235 before it can be used in a warhead. Uranium is converted into a gas, uranium hexafluoride, and spun in centrifuges to separate the uranium-235 from the heavier, stable uranium-238.
There was also “both radiological and chemical contamination” at the Natanz site that could potentially include a dangerous uranium leak. Speculating, Grossi said it was possible that uranium isotopes were dispersed inside the facility.
If so, the radiation would consist primarily of alpha particles that would pose “a significant danger if uranium is inhaled or ingested” – but the IAEA chief said this risk could be effectively managed with respiratory devices or other protective measures.
Some other Iranian nuclear sites, such as the Bushehr civil nuclear reactor, had not been attacked, the IAEA said. Four buildings were damaged at a research site at Isfahan, including a central chemical laboratory and a conversion plant, which produces uranium hexafluoride for enrichment, it added.
The escalating conflict between Israel and Iran has put global markets on edge, as the risk of a disruption to global oil supplies rises and inflation threatens to reignite.
Investors have started to reprice a range of products, from gold and currencies to oil prices and stocks, amid fears a broader Middle East conflict could take hold.
Here are four market movements to watch out for.
Over the past couple of weeks, oil has climbed from $US62 a barrel to about $US74, reversing a trend that had eased cost-of-living pressures for many households.
Motorists could be paying up to an extra 12c a litre for petrol if the recent jump in oil prices is maintained, according to the chief economist at AMP, Shane Oliver.
There are many moving parts to how fuel prices are set, not least the regular cycles of rising and falling prices that seem to defy the laws of supply and demand.
Sign up for Guardian Australia’s breaking news email
But Oliver says a rule of thumb is that every $US1 change in the international price for a barrel of oil translates to a 1c rise or fall at the bowser.
It takes a couple of weeks for wholesale fuel costs to filter through to prices at petrol stations, Oliver says. Some analysts suggest oil prices could push beyond $US80 if tensions ratchet higher in the Middle East.
Oil traders are keeping a close eye on any supply disruptions at the strait of Hormuz, a choke point for the global oil trade that Iran has previously threatened to close during times of tension with the West.
The rise in oil prices poses a particular problem for Donald Trump’s argument that the US Federal Reserve should lower interest rates, given the president’s plan to lower inflation relies in large part on falling energy costs.
Trump argued just days before Israel struck Iran that prices for everyday Americans were down, with gasoline prices dropping each month since he had taken office.
Any rise in petrol prices in the US, coupled with increased consumer prices caused by tariffs, could help fuel another spike in inflation, making rate cuts less likely.
The impact of oil prices on Australia’s inflation outlook is expected to be less pronounced. Oliver says he does not believe it will cause a big inflationary shock that could see the RBA hold off on its anticipated path of rate cuts.
Bets in financial markets on the timing of RBA rate cuts have not moved much over recent days; they continue to price in three more rate cuts this year, with the first of those at the next meeting in about three weeks’ time.
The global head of investment strategy at Saxo, Jacob Falkencrone, says there are three credible scenarios as a result of the Middle East conflict, all of which could affect interest rates differently.
The scenarios include:
The conflict is contained and energy prices quickly moderate, reducing inflationary pressures.
There is a rapid diplomatic breakthrough, and markets enjoy a relief rally. This could prompt an even faster fall in oil prices.
A regional war erupts, and oil prices surge, prompting central banks to reconsider their rate cut outlook as inflation builds.
Gold prices have hit record highs, as its safe-haven status entices huge interest from traders seeking respite from economic and geopolitical turmoil.
While the Middle East conflict has pushed the price of the precious metal towards $US3,500 an ounce, it was already soaring before Israel launched strikes against Iran.
In recent months, gold has been viewed as a reliable store of value as confidence in an alternative safe-haven, the US dollar, wanes.
This market trend has been captured by the “sell America” trade, a term that describes investors shifting money out of a range of US assets in response to Trump’s new tariff regime announced in early April.
The trade has also been underpinned by concerns over the broader economic and political outlook in the US, and has generated interest in bitcoin, which is sometimes known as gold’s digital counterpart and is popular among younger investors.
Chris Weston, the head of research at Pepperstone, says the market views the investment case for gold as relatively clearcut.
While the Australian dollar, which is traditionally a proxy for risk, slipped against the greenback immediately after Israel struck Iran, the falls have been muted. Its outlook is now closely tied to whether the conflict escalates or moderates.
The local currency has benefited from the “sell America” sentiment, which has so far limited its falls against its US counterpart.
Global share markets, including the ASX, have been knocked around by waves of volatility in recent months.
Share price movements have been mixed in the two trading days since the first Israeli strikes.
Gold stocks are up, as are shares in oil and gas companies, including Woodside. Other energy companies, such as uranium producer Paladin, are also surging due to concerns over global energy supplies.
Commodity price increases tend to flow through to a larger tax take in Australia, boosting the federal budget.
Meanwhile, global travel and airline stocks, including Qantas and Flight Centre, are down over concerns there will be a slowdown in bookings due to the hostilities. Investors are also concerned that fuel prices could hurt airline profits.
AMP says the share market “ride is likely to remain volatile in the near term”.
A Syrian doctor has been sentenced to life imprisonment for crimes against humanity in his home country – including murder and torture – by a German court.
The 40-year-old man, Alaa Mousa, worked as a junior doctor in an army hospital and a military intelligence prison in Homs and Damascus in Syria, in 2011 and 2012, in the early phase of the civil war.
He abused prisoners accused of being members of the opposition and who were considered enemies of the Syrian dictator Bashar al-Assad who had participated in the uprisings against the regime during the Arab spring. He was convicted by the court in Frankfurt of two deaths and eight cases of severe torture.
The court imposed the highest possible sentence on the man, a supporter of Assad, whose crimes – including war crimes, torture and murder – the judge, Christoph Koller, said had “seriously injured nine people, both physically and mentally, and killed two”.
He described the doctor, based on one of several experts’ reports, as having a “sadistic” nature that was given particular expression when he tortured his victims.
“Above all, the accused enjoyed harming people that he considered inferior and of lower value to himself,” Koller said.
Witnesses called to give evidence during the almost three-and-a-half-year trial described, sometimes in considerable detail, the severe abuse they had received at the hands of Mousa, including beatings and kickings, or how he deliberately set broken bones with insufficient levels of anaesthetic. They also told the court how the doctor had poured flammable liquid on their wounds and parts of their body – and in two cases, including that of a 14-year-old boy, on their genitals – and set them on fire. He injected one prisoner with a deadly poison while the man had been trying to defend himself. He died in front of fellow prisoners.
The court also heard how he had beaten and kicked a young man suffering from epileptic seizures, knowing he had the condition, which led to it worsening. He later administered a pill, which caused the man to die in the presence of his brother.
Koller praised the more than 50 witnesses who he said had possessed the courage to share the descriptions of their suffering with the court, sometimes over several days. He said without them the case could not have been brought successfully.
During her summing up, the senior public prosecutor Anna Zabeck emphasised to the court last month the difficult circumstances under which the witnesses had testified. Both they and their relatives living in Syria were repeatedly threatened and intimidated to prevent them from appearing at the trial, she said.
She said the witnesses had been “asked to give almost everything during their testimony”, by discussing the violence that had scarred them “physically and mentally”. The prosecutor Christina Schlepp added that, despite repeated accusations from the defence lawyers that the victims had been part of a conspiracy against the doctor, there were “no signs they had wanted to incriminate” Mousa for the sake of it.
During the often hours-long court sessions, Mousa mainly sat in the dock with his head bowed, and repeatedly had to blow his nose.
Mousa has lived in Germany for 10 years. He worked in various clinics over five years as an orthopaedic medic, most recently at a hospital in Bad Wildungen in the state of Hessen, in western Germany, until his arrest in summer 2020. He was recognised and reported to the authorities after some of his victims saw him in a TV documentary about the Syrian city of Homs and was placed in custody. The court case against him at Frankfurt’s higher regional court started in January 2022 and took place over nearly 190 days.
It was possible to try the doctor in a German court even though the crimes were committed in Syria due to the principle of universal jurisdiction in international criminal law. This allows for the prosecution anywhere of a person alleged to have committed war crimes.
The federal prosecutor’s office had asked for the man to receive life imprisonment – which usually runs to a maximum of 15 years in Germany – followed by preventive detention – meaning he would always stay behind bars, because of the potential danger it considered him to pose to wider society should he ever be released.
Lawyers acting for the doctor called for him to be acquitted on the charge of the two killings, arguing that he had not been working in Homs at the time they took place.
The doctor, who entered court wearing a black fur-trimmed hooded coat to cover his face, pleaded not guilty, insisting he had been the victim of a conspiracy.
European leaders at the G7 summit in Canada are trying to engineer an Iranian return to the negotiating table using Gulf leaders as intermediaries.
But Iran is demanding a joint ceasefire with Israel, while Benjamin Netanyahu, the Israeli prime minister, is resisting the move, and Donald Trump praised the Israeli campaign, suggesting he did not yet believe it was time to relieve the pressure on Iran.
The US is considered by Iran to be critical to putting pressure on Israel, but the US president wants indications that Iran will back down on wanting to maintain the right to enrich uranium. He is willing to continue to use the Israeli assault as a bargaining chip if necessary.
Asked if he had received any messages from Iran suggesting that it wanted to de-escalate the conflict, Trump hinted that he had. “They want to talk,” he said.
The US president said that Iran was not winning its conflict with Israel and should re-enter negotiations “before it’s too late”.
He added: “If Iran wants to negotiate, now is the time.”
Later on Monday, Trump said that Israel was “doing very well,” adding: “A deal will be signed and Iran is foolish not to sign one. Iran is at the negotiating table and they want to make a deal.”
Asked if he wanted to see regime change, he said he wanted to see Iran without a nuclear weapon, adding: “We are well on the way to achieving that.”
Iranian foreign minister, Abbas Araghchi, appealed to Trump to break with Netanyahu, telling the US president he was being played by an Israeli leader who was determined to scuttle a deal that Iran and the US were on the verge of sealing.
He said: “By all indications, the purpose of Netanyahu’s criminal attack on Iran – killing hundreds of innocent civilians, including women and children – is to scuttle a deal between Iran and the US, which we were on the right path to achieve. He is playing yet another American president, and ever more American taxpayers, for absolute fools.
“If President Trump is genuine about diplomacy and interested in stopping this war, next steps are consequential. Israel must halt its aggression, and absent a total cessation of military aggression against us, our responses will continue. It takes one phone call from Washington to muzzle someone like Netanyahu. That may pave the way for a return to diplomacy.”
In a joint call with Araghchi, the French, German and British foreign ministers urged Iran not to escalate by attacking US or other regional players. They also urged Iran not to go ahead with a threat to leave the nuclear non proliferation treaty or to reduce cooperation with the UN nuclear inspectorate, the IAEA, still further. The three ministers warned escalation would only cut off the remaining path to a return to diplomacy.
But some European officials admit they have no guarantees Trump will press Netanyahu to stop. Iran has said it will reopen talks with the US on its nuclear programme only once Washington orders Israel to stop bombing Iran.
The United Arab Emirates, the country that sent Trump’s first negotiating offer to Iran, has been one of the intermediaries along with Oman, Qatar and Saudi Arabia.
Oman’s foreign minister, Badr Albusaidi, the previous broker in the US-Iran talks, has been urging Tehran to return to the negotiating table, pointing to the heavily laden military odds against it.
Iranian news agencies reported the president of Iran, Masoud Pezeshkian, had warned the sultan of Oman: “If the United States does not restrain Israel, Iran will be forced to continue its response in a more severe and painful manner.”
Keir Starmer, the UK prime minister; and the French president, Emmanuel Macron, have been in touch with the UAE leadership, and Starmer claimed there was a consensus for de-escalation.
“It is really important that we focus on de-escalation, because the risks of the conflict escalating are obvious across the region and beyond the region, the impact that this could and probably will have on Gaza, which is a tinderbox, and, of course, the impact on the economy. That is why the G7 has such a focus on de-escalation. That will be an intense discussion for our talks today … this will be a central issue.”
European leaders at the G7 are warning Iran both directly and via Gulf leaders that Iranian concessions will have to be made at the negotiating table, or Israel is likely to press home its military advantage to the point of securing an end to the Iranian government formed after the revolution in 1979.
With the vast majority of its military and intelligence leadership wiped out by Israel in assassinations, Iran’s decision-making structure is in flux. Even parts of the Iranian foreign ministry in Tehran have been bombed.
European leaders are deeply concerned by doubts over the nature of any successor regime, the prospect of Iran’s breakup and a prolonged conflict that could hit world trade and send oil prices up if Iran’s leaders blocked the strait of Hormuz in a desperate attempt to cling to power.
Iran has claimed it is not interested in building a nuclear bomb, but is not saying it is willing to abandon its right to enrich uranium. That right is the red line that the Iranian foreign minister insisted on throughout the talks with the US.
The coincidence of the G7 meeting happening during the escalation in the Iran crisis has provided European leaders with an opportunity to try to reimpose themselves in the Iran negotiations from which they have been largely excluded by the US since Trump returned to the White House.
Between 2013 and 2025 the three European powers of the UK, France and Germany had been ever-present in the negotiations with Iran.
The G7 leaders are also preparing a joint statement on the Iran-Israel crisis, but Trump has so far refused to sign it.
At issue has been whether any joint statement calling for a return to diplomacy and ruling out Iran ever possessing nuclear weapons goes further by calling for a ceasefire. Some states wanted to hint at criticism of Israel for upending the US and Iranian negotiations that were due to have continued on Sunday.
But G7 member states are divided, with Japan’s prime minister, Shigeru Ishiba, on Friday sharply criticising Israel’s recent military assaults on Iran, labelling the attacks “totally intolerable” and “extremely regrettable” amid rising tensions in the region.
An Italian museum has contacted the police after two clumsy tourists almost wrecked a work of art while posing for photos.
Video footage released by Palazzo Maffei in Verona showed the hapless pair photographing each other pretending to sit on a crystal-covered chair made by the artist Nicola Bolla – described by the museum as an “extremely fragile” work.
The woman squats and does not seem to touch the work – called Van Gogh’s Chair and covered in Swarovski crystals – but the man is not so careful, sitting and then stumbling backwards as the seat buckles under his weight.
The pair can then be seen fleeing the room in footage that went viral over the weekend.
Palazzo Maffei described it as “every museum’s nightmare” and said on Monday it had made a complaint to the police, without specifying when it was filed.
The museum posted an account on social media on Thursday saying the incident had happened in the past four weeks and the chair had since been repaired.
“It was an idiotic thing to do,” Bolla told Italian magazine Fanpage. But the artist said he could see a “positive side” to the incident. “It’s like a kind of performance. Ordinary people can do it too, not just artists.”
Preliminary work aimed at identifying the remains of nearly 800 infants is starting on the site in Tuam, Co Galway, as Ireland continues to wrestle with the traumatic legacy of its mother and baby homes scandal.
Catherine Corless, a local historian who first sounded the alarm about the dark past of the institution run by nuns from the Bon Secours order, uncovered the names of 796 infants who are believed to have been buried there between 1925 and 1961, some in a disused subterranean septic tank. There were no burial records.
On Monday, excavation crews began sealing off the site before the search for remains next month. “There are so many babies, children just discarded here,” Corless told Agence France-Presse.
It was Corless’s work that led to an Irish commission of investigation into the so-called mother and baby homes, to which young women and girls were sent for decades to give birth in, rather than in hospital or at home. Doubling as orphanages and adoption agencies for much of the 20th century, the institutions were run by religious orders with sanction by the state, which overlooked deprivation, misogyny, stigma and high infant mortality rates.
The government made a formal state apology in 2021 after the commission report.
In Tuam, hoarding has been placed around the excavation site, now in the middle of a housing estate. The preliminary work is expected to last four weeks before a full-scale excavation begins on 14 July.
The site was once a workhouse and the search for the infants’ remains could be complicated by the fact that victims of the 19th century great famine are also thought to be buried there.
Daniel MacSweeney, who is overseeing the operation, told RTÉ radio: “It’s an incredibly complex challenge because of the size of the site and the fact that we are dealing with infant remains that we know, at least in the case of the memorial gardens (on the site), are co-mingled.”
The existence of mother and baby homes has been described as a dark stain on Irish society. In 2017, the then taoiseach Enda Kenny described what was revealed about Tuam as “a chamber of horrors”.
Sign up to This is Europe
The most pressing stories and debates for Europeans – from identity to economics to the environment
after newsletter promotion
Speaking in the Dáil, the Irish parliament, he did not spare his fellow citizens. “No nuns broke into our homes to kidnap our children. We gave them up to what we convinced ourselves was the nuns’ care. We gave them up maybe to spare them the savagery of gossip, the wink and the elbow language of delight in which the holier-than-thous were particularly fluent. We gave them up because of our perverse, in fact, morbid relationship with what is called respectability,” he added.
Severe thunderstorms swept across France last Friday, killing one person and injuring another. Two systems were involved, prompting orange weather warnings: the first came from the west via Brittany and hit the north of the country, and the second arrived via Spain and affected south-west France.
More than 30,000 lightning strikes were recorded between midnight on Friday and early Saturday. Eure, north of Paris, was worst hit with 4,326 strikes. Strong winds lashed Normandy – Rouen recorded a 76mph (123km)/h) gust that broke the 64mph record set in 2019. Hail affected several areas, leading to infrastructure and crop damage.
There were further storms over central and north-west France on Saturday night, many with very large hailstones. The largest, found in Orly, Auvergne-Rhône-Alpes, measured 85mm.
Several factors led to the severe weather. A key component was a phenomenon known as goutte froide, in which an isolated, upper-air cold pool detached from the overall circulation, creating significant atmospheric instability.
A thalweg d’altitude (upper-air trough) provided the lift necessary by favouring air ascent. Warm, moist air flowed into the trough and was forced upwards. As the air rose, it started to cool and water vapour began to condense, forming clouds. As these clouds swelled, they created severe thunderstorms.
As air flowed into the trough from every direction, it enabled supercells to develop by introducing the element of spin. Supercells are large-scale, highly organised storms with a rotating updraft that can sustain themselves for several hours and travel hundreds of miles – one of which swept through northern France on Friday.
A recent heat dome over the country helped intensify the storms by providing a greater gradient between the surface and the upper air, and by bringing a greater source of moisture. A heat dome occurs when high pressure persists over a region, trapping warm air and allowing temperatures to rise several degrees above the seasonal average.
The FTSE 100 has crept closer to a new closing high today, but fallen just short, as investors’ anxiety over the Middle East crisis faded today.
London’s index of leading blue-chip shares has ended the day up 24.5 points, or 0.28%, at 8875 points. That leaves the FTSE 100 slightly short of the record closing high, 8884.92, set last week.
Stocks rose in the City amid a wider rally, following reports that Iran is seeking an end to hostilities with Israel and resumption of talks over its nuclear programme.
Airline operator IAG (+1.5%) was among the top risers, along with financial stocks such as Standard Chartered (+3%), Barclays (+1.97%) and M&G (+1.9%).
Other European markets also strengthened; Germany’s DAX and France’s CAC were both up around 0.8% in late trading.
Stocks pushed higher after the Wall Street Journal reported that Iran has been urgently signaling that it seeks an end to hostilities and resumption of talks over its nuclear programs.
Reuters has been told that Iran has asked Qatar, Saudi Arabia and Oman to press US President Donald Trump to use his influence on Israel for an immediate ceasefire in return for Tehran’s flexibility in talks about its nuclear program.
That also pushed down the oil price; Brent crude is down 3.2% at $71.79 per barrel, having jumped around 7% last Friday after Israel launched an attack on Iran, hitting 100 major targets, including nuclear facilities and missile sites, and killing senior military commanders and scientists.
With European markets closed, that’s all for today.
Our Middle East liveblog has the latest on the Israel-Iran conflict:
Here’s our explainer on how the crisis could affect the oil price, and the knock-on impacts:
And here’s more of today’s news:
Wall Street remains in the green too; the Dow Jones industrial average is now up 363 points, or 0.86%, at 42,561 points.
“‘Resilient’ could be the word of the day today, with markets on both sides of the Atlantic putting on a decent show despite the backdrop of global instability,” says AJ Bell head of financial analysis Danni Hewson.
“The fact that so far key oil infrastructure hasn’t been targeted in the escalating conflict between Israel and Iran has been notable, and the oil price has been pared back today. But Brent Crude is still trading significantly up on where it was at the start of the month and that’s already raising the spectre of another cost-of-living crisis in the UK.
“Households now have a keen understanding of what conflict in another part of the world can mean for bills back home. Inflation was already going to be in focus this week as we get May’s data on Wednesday morning followed by the latest decision by the Bank of England on where interest rates will go next a day later.
“Markets are now pricing in a slim chance that the MPC will make a move on Thursday after disappointing jobs and growth data coupled with concerns that economic conditions could deteriorate later in the year if the oil price remains under pressure.
“The black stuff lubricates the wheels of our lives, providing energy to create, ship and package goods. If it becomes more expensive then that will impact prices in all sorts of areas.”
The FTSE 100 has crept closer to a new closing high today, but fallen just short, as investors’ anxiety over the Middle East crisis faded today.
London’s index of leading blue-chip shares has ended the day up 24.5 points, or 0.28%, at 8875 points. That leaves the FTSE 100 slightly short of the record closing high, 8884.92, set last week.
Stocks rose in the City amid a wider rally, following reports that Iran is seeking an end to hostilities with Israel and resumption of talks over its nuclear programme.
Airline operator IAG (+1.5%) was among the top risers, along with financial stocks such as Standard Chartered (+3%), Barclays (+1.97%) and M&G (+1.9%).
Other European markets also strengthened; Germany’s DAX and France’s CAC were both up around 0.8% in late trading.
Stocks pushed higher after the Wall Street Journal reported that Iran has been urgently signaling that it seeks an end to hostilities and resumption of talks over its nuclear programs.
Reuters has been told that Iran has asked Qatar, Saudi Arabia and Oman to press US President Donald Trump to use his influence on Israel for an immediate ceasefire in return for Tehran’s flexibility in talks about its nuclear program.
That also pushed down the oil price; Brent crude is down 3.2% at $71.79 per barrel, having jumped around 7% last Friday after Israel launched an attack on Iran, hitting 100 major targets, including nuclear facilities and missile sites, and killing senior military commanders and scientists.
UK prime minister Keir Starmer has declared that Britain and the United States should “very soon” finalise the implementation of a trade deal agreed last month.
Speaking to reporters in Canada, on the sidelines of a Group of Seven (G7) meeting, Starmer said:
“I’m certainly seeing President Trump today, and I’m going to discuss with him our trade deal.
“I’m very pleased that we made that trade deal, and we’re in the final stages now of implementation, and I expect that to be completed very soon.”
Once finalised, that deal should lower the tariffs on UK-made cars, steel and aluminium.
Shares have jumped higher in New York, and the oil price is sliding faster, following a report that Iran has signalled it wants to de-escalate hostilities with Israel and negotiate.
The Wall Stret Journal is reporting that Iran has been urgently signaling that it seeks an end to hostilities and resumption of talks over its nuclear programs, sending messages to Israel and the United States via Arab intermediaries.
This is pushing equities up on Wall Street, where the S&P 500 share index is now up 69 points or 1.1% at 6,046 points.
Oil has weakened, though – with Brent crude having now fallen by 3.4% today to $71.70 per barrel. That wipes out about half of its jump on Friday.
With a little over an hour’s trading to go, London’s stock market is flirting with a new record high.
The FTSE 100 index of blue-chip shares has now risen to 8881 points, up 0.35% today.
That puts the Footsie just 3 points away from the record closing high of 8,884 points set last week [the alltime intraday high, of 8,908 points, is a little further away].
Over in New York, the stock market has opened higher as geopolitical anxiety appears to ease.
The Dow Jones industrial average has risen by 265 points, or 0.6%, in early trading to 42,463 points.
The broader S&P 500 share index has gained 0.6%.
David Morrison, senior market analyst at fintech and financial services provider Trade Nation, reports that traders have been snapping up shares following the drop in values since Friday morning.
Morrison says:
The selling continued as markets reopened late on Sunday. But traders then bought into the dip, increasing their long side exposure once again. Time will tell if this is short-term opportunism, or a more general uptick in risk appetite.
Hostilities between Israel and Iran continued over the weekend. Despite this, it appears that market participants are less concerned about the possibility of the violence spreading throughout the region than they were last week.
It appears that most of the airstrikes and missiles have avoided the most significant parts of Iran’s energy infrastructure. But there are fears that this could change. In addition, Iran has threatened to disrupt, or even shut down, the Strait of Hormuz, through which around 20% of global oil is transported. But some analysts think that this is unlikely, given that this is an important route for Iranian oil to China, its major customer.
Israel’s government bonds are also rallying today.
Reuters reports that an Israeli bond maturing in 2054 has risen by more than 1% today.
Israel’s currency is on track for its best day against the US dollar since the 2008 financial crisis.
The shekel has gained around 3% today, rising to 3.51 to the dollar, up from 3.61 on Friday.
The shekel had weakened last Friday after Israel launched its attack on Iran, on fears that its economy could be hurt if the conflict escalated.
Analysts also suggested that the clashes could push back the timeline for monetary easing by the Bank of Israel; higher interest rates tend to support a currency.
Oof! Business activity continued to decline in New York State in June, new data shows.
The latest Empire State Manufacturing Survey, just released, indicates that business conditions in the state declined again this month,
Firms reported that new orders and shipments declined, and supply availability worsened – possibly a sign that Donald Trump’s trade war continues to hurt the US economy.
Overall, the Empire State headline general business conditions index fell seven points to -16.0, from -9 in May, weaker than expected.
US June Empire State Factory Index at -16, below estimate of -5.5-15min News
In brighter news, though, the survey also found that firms have turned optimistic about the outlook, with the future general business conditions index rising above zero for the first time since March.
Empire State Manufacturing index fell to -16.0 in June—4th monthly drop. Orders & shipments down, but jobs rose for first time since Jan. Firms optimistic: future outlook index hit 21.2. Inflation pressures eased slightly. pic.twitter.com/dd9A3PY4gD
The survey was conducted between 2 and 9 June, after the US and China agreed their trade war truce in Geneva last month, but before their latest meeting in London last week had concluded.
The Israel-Iran conflict, and its impact on oil prices, looms over central banks such as the Bank of England, which is scheduled to set interest rates on Thursday.
The BoE is expected to leave borrowing costs unchanged this week, with a cut possible at its August or September meetings.
Professor Costas Milas, of the University of Liverpool’s Management School, tells us:
As the war between Israel and Iran continues, the outlook for oil prices is bound to become extremely uncertain. Notice that the Bank of England’s latest (in May) Monetary Policy Report assumes (Brent) oil prices of $64 per barrel for both 2025 and 2026.
This is much lower than today’s oil price of $74.60. If the conflict continues, there are clear, and adverse, implications for (UK) inflation and GDP growth. It looks certain that the MPC will keep interest rates unchanged this week. The next decision is in early August.
Nevertheless, if the war escalates, the MPC can still run an unscheduled meeting in July to deal with potentially hugely adverse effects on inflation and growth.
European natural gas prices have risen today, as the energy markets continue to be influenced by events in the Middle East.
Bloomberg has the details:
Benchmark futures rose as much as 3.4% on Monday to the highest since early April, after jumping 4.8% on Friday. Open hostilities between Israel and Iran entered a fourth day with no sign of easing, stoking fears of a broader conflict in the energy-rich region.
For gas traders, the biggest concern is that a further escalation could disrupt shipments through the Strait of Hormuz, a key waterway for seaborne supplies. While physical delivery of liquefied natural gas doesn’t currently appear to be affected, any interruption would strain the market at a crucial time in Europe’s stockpiling season.
“If the narrow passage is closed, it would have a severe impact on markets,” said Arne Lohmann Rasmussen, chief analyst at Global Risk Management in Copenhagen. “We are seeing a growing risk that the market may become concerned about storage levels as winter approaches.”
The dip in the oil price today is lifting shares in some airlines.
IAG, which owns British Airways, are up 2.5% today, with Germany’s Lufthansa up 1.4%.
Encouraging news: Businesses have grown less pessimistic about the world economy’s near-term outlook.
That’s according to Oxford Economics’ June Global Risk Survey, which shows that the de-escalation of tensions between the US and China have lifted growth expectations.
The Risk Survey found that businesses are confident that recession risks have declined. Respondents see less than a 15% chance of global recession this year, compared with more than 25% in April.
However, sentiment remains weaker than earlier in the year, before Donald Trump’s ‘liberation day’ tariff hike announcements at the start of April.
European shares are “surprisingly resilient” today against a backdrop of uncertainty,” says Russ Mould, investment director at AJ Bell.
That resilience has helped to push the major European stock markets higher this morning, as they recover from Friday’s wobble.
Mould points out that despite a weekend of violence between Israel and Iran, investors show no signs of panicking; future prices imply a positive day for Wall Street when US markets open later on.
Mould writes:
“The gold price is often a measure of investor sentiment, going up when people are worried and going down when they’re optimistic. The precious metal slipped 0.6% to $3,432 per ounce which indicates that investors remain alert to ongoing geopolitical tensions but they’re not reaching for their tin hats.
“The Middle East conflict remains a fluid situation and there is the potential for markets to still experience sudden jolts if the tension escalates further.”
But as things stand, the UK’s FTSE 100 index is now up 0.5% or 42 points, at 8,893 – closing in on its alltime high.
Germany’s DAX is 0.3% higher, while France’s CAC has gained 0.7%.
With shares up this morning, and the oil price now down, investors will be pondering how much weight to put on geopolitical issues.
According to a new research note from Deutshe Bank, geopolitics historically onla has a wider market impact when it affects macro variables like growth and inflation.
Deutsche Bank’s Henry Allen writes:
So for markets, the geopolitical events that mattered were the stagflation shocks, like the 1970s oil crises, the Gulf War in 1990, and Russia’s invasion of Ukraine in 2022.
Today, we haven’t seen a shock on that scale so far. Brent crude oil prices are still beneath their 2024 average of around $80/bbl. So this isn’t causing wider inflationary problems yet. Clearly, a larger price spike would evoke the 2022 scenario where central banks hiked rates to clamp down on inflation. But so far at least, we’re yet to see that. If anything, the extent of the market’s resilience to repeated shocks in 2025 has been a significant story in itself.
The risk-off sentiment that gripped financial markets on Friday appears to be fading, even though Israel and Iran have continued to launch attacks at each other.
After rising in early trading, the oil price has now dipped by almost 1% today, with Brent crude back down below $74/barrel. That still leaves it up over 6% since Thursday night, just before Israel launched its attack on Iran.
Achilleas Georgolopoulos, senior market analyst at Trading Point, reports:
Risk appetite appears to be improving slightly today, with the dollar losing a bit of ground, both oil and gold surrendering a decent portion of their recent gains, and bitcoin climbing to the $106k area again. However, this risk-on reaction could quickly reverse, especially if Iran openly threatens to block the Hormuz Straits.
Iran has condemned Israel’s attack on a state television building in Tehran as a “war crime”, and called on the UN to take action.
The strike on the offices of IRIB during a live broadcast was a “wicked act” and a “war crime”, said a foreign ministry spokesperson. “The UN [security council] must act now to stop the genocidal aggressor from committing further atrocities against our people.”
An Israeli attack hit the building as a presenter was speaking live, saying that the studio was filling with dust after “the sound of aggression against the homeland”.
Suddenly, the sound of an explosion could be heard, and the presenter hurried off-camera as dust and debris appeared in the studio.
Cries of “Allahu Akbar” (“God is greatest”) could be heard off-screen and the broadcast abruptly switched to prerecorded programming. Live coverage resumed shortly after.
The Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps condemned the attack, calling it “inhuman, criminal and a terrorist act”.
After decades of enmity and a prolonged shadow war, on Friday Israel launched a surprise attack, saying it was targeting Iran’s nuclear and military facilities. So far it has killed at least 224 people in Iran, including top military commanders, nuclear scientists and civilians.
Iran has retaliated with barrages of drone and missiles that have killed at least 24 people in Israel, according to the latest figures from the prime minister’s office.
Iran does not recognise Israel and has long accused it of carrying out sabotage operations against its nuclear facilities and killing its scientists.
Investigators are preparing to study the pilots’ last words for clues as to the cause of last week’s Air India plane crash after recovering the cockpit voice recorder from the wreckage.
The voice recorder was in the Boeing 787 aircraft’s second black box, which the Indian authorities said they had found on Sunday. The first, containing the flight data recorder, was located within 28 hours of Thursday’s disaster in Ahmedabad, in which at least 279 people died.
Most of the victims were onboard flight AI171 bound for London Gatwick, all but one of whom died after the plane crashed into buildings moments after failing to properly take off from Ahmedabad airport.
The captain, Sumeet Sabharwal, sent a mayday call seconds after the plane left the runway.
No evidence or explanation has yet been shared from the investigation, led by Indian officials with assistance from the UK and US. They were reported to be initially focusing on engine failure and issues with the wing flaps and landing gear to trace the causes of one of the world’s worst ever plane crashes.
Most relatives of the 279 known victims, 38 of whom were killed on the ground, were still waiting on Monday for results of DNA testing before health officials could return the bodies of their ones.
About 80 of the deceased had been identified by late on Sunday, according to a doctor at Ahmedabad’s civil hospital, Rajnish Patel. “This is a meticulous and slow process, so it has to be done meticulously only,” Patel said.
While some mourners have held funerals, most are facing an anguished wait.
Rinal Christian, 23, the younger brother of a passenger, told the AFP news agency: “They said it would take 48 hours. But it’s been four days and we haven’t received any response. My brother was the sole breadwinner of the family. So what happens next?”
One of the latest victims identified was a former chief minister of Gujarat state and senior member of India’s ruling party, whose flag-draped coffin was carried in Ahmedabad by soldiers.
One victim’s relatives who did not want to be named told AFP they had been instructed not to open the coffin when they receive it.
Air India said there were 169 Indian passengers, 53 British, seven Portuguese and a Canadian onboard the flight, as well as 12 crew members.
In London, members of the UK’s Indian community took part in a multi-faith vigil outside the Indian high commission on Sunday. Only one passenger survived the crash, a British man, Vishwash Kumar Ramesh.
Sign up to Business Today
Get set for the working day – we'll point you to all the business news and analysis you need every morning
after newsletter promotion
It was the first crash involving a Boeing 787 Dreamliner. Air India was ordered to carry out additional maintenance and checks on the 33 remaining planes in its fleet but big airlines around the world continue to operate the model as normal. More than 1,000 are in regular service.
Investigators will also have to consider the possibility of human error and aspects such as aircraft maintenance at the airline, which is owned by Tata Group. The company has been trying to revamp its ageing fleet.
Air India’s chair, N Chandrasekaran, told staff on Monday that the crash should be a catalyst to improve safety, urging employees to be resolute in the face of any criticism.
During a meeting attended by nearly 700 staff at the company’s headquarters near Delhi, Chandrasekaran said it was the most heartbreaking crisis of his career. “We need to use this incident as an act of force to build a safer airline,” he said.
“We need to wait for the investigation ... It’s a complex machine, so a lot of redundancies, checks and balances, certifications, which have been perfected over years and years. Yet this happens, so we will figure out why it happens after the investigation.”
An Air India 787 bound for New Delhi from Hong Kong turned back as a precautionary measure on Monday after the pilot suspected a technical issue, a source told Reuters.
Flight AI315 landed safety in Hong Kong at 1.15pm local time and was undergoing checks.
Boeing has further scaled back its presence at the Paris airshow, one of the global aerospace industry’s leading commercial events, cancelling a media reception on Monday. Its chief executive, Kelly Ortberg, had already pulled out and a Boeing team has been sent to Ahmedabad to offer assistance to the investigation.
Donald Trump has displayed his disdain for the collective western values supposedly championed by the G7 group of industrialised countries by again demanding that Russia be readmitted to the group. He also said the war in Ukraine would not have happened if Moscow had been kept in the club.
Trump made his remarks in front of media, alongside Canada’s prime minister, Mark Carney, who is hosting the G7, at the start of the summit’s first round of talks.
Russia was thrown out of the G8 after it invaded Crimea in 2014, and Trump’s defence of Vladimir Putin came a day before the US president is scheduled to meet his Ukrainian counterpart, Volodymyr Zelenskyy, on the fringes of the summit. It will be the first meeting between the two men since Pope’s Francis’s funeral in April.
Zelenskyy is pressing for a reluctant Trump to respond to Putin’s refusal to agree a 30-day ceasefire by applying sanctions on Russia that the US Senate has already approved.
Trump, however, has shown little sign of losing patience, and late on Monday said he was still waiting to see whether a deal could be reached with Moscow.
“Sanctions costs us a lot of money. It costs the US a lot of money. You are talking about billions and billions of dollars,” he said.
Earlier in the day he repeated his opinion that expelling Russia from the G8 was a “big mistake”.
“You wouldn’t have that war,” he said. “You know you have your enemy at the table, I don’t even consider, he wasn’t really an enemy at that time.”
He blamed the former Canadian prime minister Justin Trudeau and Barack Obama for Putin’s expulsion, although it took place during the administration of Trudeau’s predecessor Stephen Harper.
“Obama didn’t want him, and the head of your country didn’t want him,” Trump said, naming Trudeau several times and calling the ousting a mistake.
The European Commission president, Ursula von der Leyen, signalled that the EU would be asking the US and other G7 member states to tighten sanctions on Russia by lowering the cap at which Russian oil can be bought from $60 a barrel to $45.
The aim is to reduce Russian revenues from oil sales. The G7 originally set up the complex price cap, so the EU needs the support of all G7 states to lower it.
Von der Leyen told reporters: “To achieve peace through strength we must put more pressure on Russia to secure a real ceasefire, to bring Russia to the negotiating table, and to end this war.
“Sanctions are critical to that end. As a result of the G7 and EU sanctions combined, for example, Russian oil and gas revenues have fallen by almost 80% since the beginning of the war.”
The EU is preparing an 18th round of sanctions heavily focused on cutting off Russia’s oil revenues.
Ahead of his meeting with Trump, Zelenskyy said: “Russia spits in the face of everything the international community is trying to do to stop this war.”
He said the latest Russian attacks on energy infrastructure came right after Putin had spoken to Trump offering to act as a mediator in the Iran-Israel crisis.
“This war could have ended long ago if the world had reacted to Russia in a principled way instead of falling for manipulation and lies,” he said.
He said that unlike Russia, Ukraine had complied with US requests not to target its opponent’s energy facilities.
Trump also gave no obvious ground on tariffs in his bilateral meeting with Carney. “I’m a tariff person,” he said. “It’s simple, it’s easy, it’s precise and it just goes very quickly.
“I think Mark has a more complex idea, but also very good.”
Trump has imposed levies on steel, aluminium, cars and other Canadian products that do not comply with the continental free trade agreement’s rules of origin.
 This article was amended on 17 June 2025. An earlier version quoted Donald Trump blaming Justin Trudeau for the expulsion of Russia from G8; however, for clarity, this occurred during the administration of Stephen Harper.
A high-ranking Syrian general under former president Bashar al-Assad who is now in Lebanon has reportedly told US investigators that the American journalist Austin Tice, who disappeared in 2012, is dead.
Bassam Hassan was a top security adviser once accused of facilitating chemical attacks on civilians. In a recent meeting with the FBI and CIA, he claimed that Assad – who was ousted in December and has since fled to Moscow – ordered Tice’s execution, according to the New York Times and the BBC, which first reported the allegation. Each media organization cited sources familiar with the matter. Hassan’s claims remain unverified.
Tice, a former marine who had done freelance journalism for the Washington Post and CBS, among other outlets, was abducted at a Damascus checkpoint in August 2012 when he was 31 years old. He briefly escaped but was recaptured and reportedly held in a detention center under Hassan’s control.
US officials have long suspected Hassan’s involvement in Tice’s imprisonment. Hassan is also seen as a valuable source on other US intelligence interests, including Syria’s chemical weapons program and Iranian activity in the region.
Over the years conflicting reports have surfaced regarding whether Tice is still alive. In response to Hassan’s account, the Tice family issued a statement to the New York Times, saying they were disappointed it had been published and doubted it was true.
Hassan was sanctioned by the US in 2014 for arms procurement and is wanted by French judges for allegedly helping coordinate sarin gas attacks in 2013. He reportedly maintained close ties with Iran’s Revolutionary Guards in Syria.
In December 2024, after rebel forces seized Damascus, Hassan fled to Iran with Iranian assistance. He later traveled voluntarily to Lebanon. Since April, US investigators have interviewed Hassan multiple times, though the extent of his cooperation remains unclear.
Tice’s whereabouts had long been a subject of mystery. After his abduction footage was released showing him blindfolded and surrounded by armed, masked men, but US officials believed it was staged in an attempt to frame militants for the kidnapping. Diplomatic efforts and a CIA-led taskforce tried unsuccessfully to find him, even offering rewards. But the fall of Assad’s regime had raised hopes of resolving the case and Syria’s new president, Ahmed al-Shara, has pledged to assist the search.
Earlier this month, BBC News obtained intelligence files reportedly confirming Tice had been imprisoned in Damascus. In a rare admission, the former Syrian general Safwan Bahloul said he personally interrogated Tice, marking the first time a Syrian official has acknowledged direct contact.
Debra Tice, his mother, told the Guardian in January that the family was not giving up hope in the search for her son.
  “Austin, if you can somehow hear this, I love you. I know you’re not giving up and neither am I,” she said.
British people in Israel are being told to register with the Foreign Office ​s​o the UK government ​c​an assist them if they wish to leave the country.
David Lammy, the foreign secretary, told MPs on Monday his department was asking all British nationals to notify the government and receive instructions on how best to leave, after the country closed down its airspace.
With Israel and Iran continuing their air attacks against each other, fears are growing for hundreds of thousands of Britons living in the broader region.
Lammy told the Commons: “We are asking all British nationals in Israel to register their presence with the FCDO [Foreign Office], so that we can share important information on the situation and leaving the country.
“Israel and Iran have closed their airspace until further notice, and our ability therefore to provide support in Iran is extremely limited. British nationals in the region should closely monitor our travel advice for further updates.”
Keir Starmer, who is in Canada for the G7 summit, separately said: “For British nationals in Israel, we’re giving advice today to register their presence. There will be a portal for that.”
The prime minister spent Sunday evening talking to four of the other world leaders at the summit, largely about the Middle East crisis. The prime minister held informal discussions with Friedrich Merz, the German chancellor; France’s president, Emmanuel Macron; Mark Carney, the Canadian prime minister; and Giorgia Meloni, the Italian prime minister, Downing Street said.
While UK officials stressed this was not a snub to Donald Trump given the US president did not arrive at the summit until later on Sunday night, the talks will be seen as a way for a key group of G7 leaders to present a united front to the volatile US president. Starmer is due to meet Trump later on Monday.
In the UK, the government is increasingly concerned about the welfare of British nationals in the region. The government does not have plans to evacuate British citizens itself, but Lammy said on Monday the Foreign Office was sending support teams to Jordan and Egypt to help people who were able to cross the borders with Israel by land.
“The situation remains fast-moving,” he said. “We expect more strikes in the days to come. This is a moment of grave danger for the region.”
Both Lammy and Starmer stressed their desire for both sides to step back from the conflict, which the foreign secretary warned posed “real risks for the global economy”.
Speaking in Canada, Starmer added: “What we need to do today is to bring that together and to be clear about how it is to be brought about.
“But the risk of the conflict escalating is obvious, I think, and the implications, not just for the region but globally, are really immense, so the focus has to be on de-escalation.”
A low cloud of misery and horror settles on this sombre movie from Tunisian writer-director Lotfi Achour, inspired by a brutal event in his country from 2015. A teenage shepherd called Mabrouk Soltani was murdered and beheaded on Mount Mghila in central Tunisia by members of Jund al-Khilafah (“soldiers of the caliphate”), the Tunisian branch of Islamic State, which habitually hides out in that remote, rugged region. They videoed their grotesque homicide, claiming the boy was an army spy and ordered his terrified 14-year-old cousin, who was with him, to carry the severed head back to his village as a brutal “message” – and this boy obeyed, in a stricken state of trauma that can only be guessed at. This horrifying event was to assume the status of national scandal in Tunisia two years later when the victim’s elder brother was also murdered by IS in the same place and on the same pretext. (Four jihadis were convicted in 2019 and another 45 in absentia.)
Achour’s film centres on the first event, while anticipating the second. Achraf (Ali Helali) goes up the mountain with his older cousin Nizar (Yassine Samouni), who brings his goats there because it is the only place with water for the herd to drink – and because it is beautiful. The nightmarish attack ensues and the village goes into deep shock; the head is kept in a refrigerator and despite the obvious danger of another attack, Nizar’s brother grimly resolves to lead a party of volunteers, including Achraf, back up into the mountain to recover the rest of the body so Nizar can be given a proper burial. All the while the heartless and prurient press gather at his home.
The tone seems to be balanced between tragic and macabre, and at first it seems as if Achraf will carry the head in the bag back into his community and, in a state of profound shock, might even go into a state of denial about what has happened. That isn’t the case – or not exactly. Once the awful truth is disclosed, he has to talk to the girl with whom poor Nizar was hopelessly and unrequitedly in love, and this trauma brings her together with Achraf. He also has hallucinatory encounters and conversations with Nizar, which I think don’t entirely work and bring the film close to a kind of emollient fantasy dimension. However the movie is well acted, and honestly attempts to encompass the unbearable grief suffered by the family, although the bizarre element of mystery and the hateful political malice of IS, particularly with the second murder, can’t really be represented.
 Red Path is in cinemas from 20 June.
The stream of wounded in Imam Khomeini hospital in Tehran had been steady since Friday. On Sunday evening it became a flood. A renewed wave of Israeli strikes on Iran’s capital overwhelmed the hospital’s emergency unit, turning it into what one doctor described as a “bloodbath”.
“It was a bloodbath. We were overwhelmed by chaos and the screams of grieving family members. Dozens upon dozens of people with life-threatening injuries, minor wounds and even bodies were brought in,” a doctor at the emergency unit of the hospital told the Guardian on Monday under condition of anonymity.
As fighting between Israel and Iran entered its fourth day, Iranian hospitals were receiving a surge of wounded people, overwhelming medical facilities and exhausted personnel. Medical staff described scenes of bloody chaos and an influx of injured people that has only seemed to grow as Israeli strikes increased in intensity.
“I’ve seen toddlers, teenagers, adults and the elderly alike. Profusely bleeding mothers were rushing in with their children injured by shrapnel,” the doctor said, adding that some parents did not realise they themselves were injured until they put their children down.
They rattled off a list of injuries: metal lodged in femur bones and the soft tissues of the hip joints, internal bleeding and severe burns. Many of those wounded had been nearby when an Israeli bomb dropped, peppering them with deadly shrapnel.
Fighting began after Israel conducted hundreds of airstrikes on Iran early on Friday morning, which it said were aimed at preventing Iran from obtaining a nuclear weapon. Iran responded with a salvo of missiles and drones, and the violence between the two countries has escalated since.
Iranian authorities on Monday morning said 1,277 people had been taken to hospital across the country’s university hospital network – of whom 224 had died.
The doctor at the Imam Khomeini suggested the true toll was greater. At his hospital, more beds had been assigned to the intensive care unit while patients with minor injuries were being transferred to other clinics, he said.
Staff in the ICU had been instructed not to post any details about the number of wounded or dead on social media, and the rota was being monitored by department heads. A Tehran-based journalist said authorities had denied requests for information on the number of dead and wounded.
A spokesperson for the Iranian ministry of health, Hossein Kermanpour, said more than 90% of casualties were civilians. The Israeli prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, claimed Israel was exclusively hitting targets belonging to the Iranian government.
“When we control the skies over Tehran, we are hitting these targets, the targets of the regime, unlike the criminal regime of Iran that targets our citizens and comes to kill children and women,” Netanyahu said during a visit to an airbase in central Israel on Monday.
Iranian ballistic missiles have hit military sites and residential areas alike, killing at least 17 in Israel, including three children.
Iranian authorities claimed Israel had bombed a hospital in Kermanshah, west Iran, injuring patients. A dramatic video showed a television anchor fleeing mid-broadcast as Israeli bombs appeared to hit the state TV station on Monday evening.
“There are many dead individuals, but I can’t tell who is who or how many there are. We don’t know which one of them was a regime officer – I am only looking to save the lives of as many as I can,” a medic at a city hospital in Karaj, west of Tehran, said under condition of anonymity. They blamed Israel for targeting residential areas, but said they felt the Iranian government had little regard for civilian lives.
The medical staff described witnessing children as young as four with limbs fractured from the force of nearby blasts. They were exhausted and had been asked to work back-to-back shifts as injured people continued to arrive from other hospitals.
“We haven’t had the time to eat or drink. I fear after this morning we are going to have more bodies coming in,” the medic said.
Iran reportedly asked Gulf states on Monday to petition Donald Trump to help mediate a ceasefire with Israel, but on the ground the conflict showed no signs of abating.
For medical staff in Iran, already stretched to their limits, the prospect of continued bombings was daunting.
“The past three days have brought back horrific memories,” the doctor at the Imam Khomeini hospital said. “It reminds me of visuals from the Iran-Iraq war. The injuries are terrifying and it looks like we are working in a makeshift hospital on a battlefield.”
Twelve-year-old Ahmad Zeidan’s mother was shot and killed in front of him as she tried to secure food for her starving family at one of Gaza’s new US-backed distribution points. He lay beside her body for hours, afraid to stand up and run because any movement might cause his death.
His mother’s death was one of many over the past few days at the hands of Israeli forces on the way to or at facilities operated by the Gaza Humanitarian Foundation (GHF). On Sunday 1 June, more than 30 were killed. On Monday 2 June, three were killed. On Tuesday 3 June, 27 were killed. Sunday 8 June, four killed. Tuesday 10 June, 17 killed. On Wednesday 11 June, 60 people were reported killed.
In Gaza, hunger has been used as a weapon of war since the beginning of the genocide to weaken and control us. When the US humanitarian aid started to prepare distribution points to provide food supplies to people in Gaza, they offered a glimmer of hope that this hunger would finally be relieved. Now there is no hope. These aid points have become death traps. I’m darkly reminded of the Red Light, Green Light episode of Squid Game, except no one in Gaza wins.
At Netzarim distribution point, people weak with hunger walked up to 15km over hot sand but, on arrival, were stopped at barriers and forced to pass through them one by one. Then they were led into an area surrounded by fences, where boxes of basic supplies were scattered on the ground, triggering frantic scrambles. People fought desperately to reach them.
Some took only items they deemed valuable such as flour, which has become unaffordable, and left the rest behind. There were no clear systems to prioritise vulnerable individuals such as widows, the injured or elderly people. The scene resembled throwing meat into a cage of starving lions and watching them fight for survival. Of course, only the strongest win.
After only 10 or 15 minutes, tanks began approaching the fences and opened fire on the crowd shooting at everyone, young and old alike. People began running, desperate to escape. Some carried the little they managed to grab, others fled with empty hands. They saw people falling around them, but couldn’t stop to help. Stopping meant dying.
Some made it out alive from their visits to aid points. I heard my neighbour returning from a trip that lasted more than four hours. He was calling to his children: “Baba, Baba, I brought you bread! Baba, I brought you sugar!” I looked through the window and saw his children screaming with joy and hugging him. He was dripping with sweat, wearing only a vest. His shirt was tied to his back, filled with the small amount of aid he’d managed to gather.
People are desperate. People are hungry. We are not bad people. We are not violent or wild. We are people who value our dignity more than anything. But the hunger we are facing is indescribable. Food is a right, not a privilege to be fought for. Yet we are living through famine. There is simply nothing to eat. When we go to the markets, there is nothing available. The roads are full of armed men who target the weak to take any aid they do manage to access. Then the merchants take it and sell it at hugely inflated prices.
By contrast, Unrwa’s aid system offered a different model, one that was structured, humane and community-based. My father, who is a teacher in Unrwa schools, used to work with them in distributing food stamps and supplies to the people. Aid was handed out by familiar, trusted community members – teachers, neighbours – under the protection of local security. Most importantly, people were treated with dignity.
The system was divided into monthly rounds, starting with large families and then moving down to smaller ones, each family having a registration number. Every family in Gaza used to receive their fair share through this system – flour, gas, sugar, oil and other essentials – all distributed through coupons in an orderly and dignified way.
Even though there weren’t many types of food available, at least we did not starve. We had enough to eat, to fill our stomachs. Today, we are starving. This is so-called humanitarian aid. But it is anything but humanitarian. It is humiliation, nothing more.
Esraa Abo Qamar is a writer based in Gaza
Do you have an opinion on the issues raised in this article? If you would like to submit a response of up to 300 words by email to be considered for publication in our letters section, please click here.

Zola Madikane* was born HIV positive in 2004. Put on antiretrovirals (ARVs) as a baby, she has been on the life-saving medication ever since and has lived a normal life. No longer. “Now, I have a problem,” she says.
For most of her life her viral load (the amount of HIV in her blood) has been undetectable. “When I went for my February clinic visit, I didn’t get my pills. They told me ‘shortage of staff’ and ‘come back another day’. I came back a few times, but it was the same story.”
Madikane, who is seven months pregnant, took no ARVs in March or April. She finally managed to get a batch in mid-May but by then her viral load was sky high. “It has never been high like this,” she says. “It is too risky for my unborn baby.” The risk of transmitting the virus to her child during delivery or while breastfeeding is much higher if her HIV is detectable.
“My fear is that I will get sick more, I will get other infections like TB. And my fear for my baby is too big,” she adds. “I don’t want my boy to be positive.”
Madikane knows first-hand the mental struggles of growing up with HIV: “At school they teased me,” she says. “They would say, ‘You are positive … Why are you always going to the clinic? Why are you eating pills?’”
Sister Sibongile Mqaba, who has worked in the same clinic in Cape Town for 32 years, is hopeful that Madikane will get her viral load down before she delivers. But Madikane is not the only patient struggling to get treatment since the suspension of most Pepfar (President’s Emergency Plan for Aids Relief) funding to South Africa. Since initial cuts in January, US president Donald Trump has made further significant reductions.
South Africa’s health minister, Aaron Motsoaledi, has complicated matters by insisting that the country’s HIV programme is “not collapsing” and assuring the public that there is no shortage of ARVs.
While it appears US funding cuts have not significantly dented ARV supply, Madikane’s story illustrates that access to treatment is about more than pharmaceutical supply. The abrupt stop-work order issued to Anova Health Institute, the largest recipient of Pepfar funding in South Africa, on 25 January meant that her local clinic didn’t have sufficient staff to meet patient demand on the days she visited.
It is not all about ARVs and Pepfar funding, either. Since 2016, Dr Dvora Joseph Davey, a US epidemiologist based in South Africa, has implemented several studies in government clinics in the Klipfontein area of Cape Town, all funded by the US National Institutes of Health (NIH). One study established that PrEP (pre-exposure prophylaxis, medication taken by HIV-negative people to prevent them acquiring HIV during sex) was safe for use by pregnant and breastfeeding women – a global first. Another study, called Scope-PP, which began in 2023, sought to optimise the rollout of PrEP in eight maternity clinics across Cape Town.
On 1 May, Davey was informed that her NIH funding could no longer be given to foreign sub-awards or collaborators outside the US. Friday 30 May was the study’s last day.
The 18 women who were directly employed by the University of Cape Town as counsellors, interviewers, nurses, trainers and data collectors have all lost their jobs. The same is true for at least half of the 224 health workers around Cape Town who Davey’s team had trained to provide PrEP for pregnant and breastfeeding women. “Effective use of PrEP is about far more than simply taking a daily pill,” says Davey. “Counselling, testing and support are all just as important.”
As an associate professor at the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), Davey receives funding awards from the NIH. For the past decade she has collaborated with the University of Cape Town via sub-awards, but the Trump administration has put a stop to this. “I have over $300,000 [£222,000] granted to me via UCLA that I cannot get into South Africa,” she says.
It’s a similar story across the country: a Médecins Sans Frontières report shows that in South Africa alone Trump’s funding cuts have put at least 27 HIV trials and 20 TB trials at risk.
South Africa is possibly the most important place in the world for HIV research. Not only does it have more people living with HIV than any other country, but it also has world-class medical infrastructure. “We can do meaningful research in a small community with 1,000 participants,” says Davey. “To achieve the same outcomes in the US we would need 100,000 participants and millions and millions of dollars.” Recent analysis shows that every $1 of NIH funding generates approximately $2.56 of economic activity.
Then there is the impact on participants’ lives. In the absence of intervention, the rate of mother-to-child transmission of HIV during birth and while breastfeeding can range from 15 to 45%. With the inclusion of antiretroviral drugs during and after pregnancy the rate is less than 2%.
South Africa had achieved a significant reduction in mother-to-child HIV transmission, with the rate dropping to 2.6% in 2024 from almost 15% in 2008. “We were well on track to eliminate infant HIV,” says Davey. “But without PrEP, ART [antiretroviral treatment] and other interventions, we will see rates of mother-to-child transmission increase.”
One study of 50,461 infants born to HIV-positive mothers in the Western Cape, where Cape Town is located, found that among pregnant women with elevated viral load (not on ART, or recently acquired HIV), 18% of infants were born with HIV. “We don’t want to go back to those days,” Davey says.
In all of 2024, three babies were born with HIV in the clinics in Davey’s study. In the first five months of this year, even before cuts have fully taken effect, there have already been three cases.
What’s more, “closing these trials early violates the ethical standards we work by”, says Davey. “When a patient starts in the study, we promise to provide treatment and counselling until the end of the study. We’ve had to stop our study early and transition people back to the clinic to get their PrEP. And often the clinic doesn’t have the nurses and counsellors or the PrEP.”
One such patient is Vuyisile Ndungane*. She came to the clinic in 2024 during her second pregnancy and was told about PrEP by Lindelwa Dube, a counsellor trained by Davey. “The moment Lindelwa introduced me to PrEP, I decided to use it till I gave birth,” says Ndungane. “She helped me so much.”
As part of the study, Ndungane was given counselling about the importance of knowing her partner’s HIV status and given oral HIV self-tests. “When my baby was four months old, I asked my husband to test,” she says. “He was happy to test, he wanted us to help each other.”
His test came back positive.
“He was sad and surprised and angry,” says Ndungane. “In the beginning I was not OK. I wanted to know the truth. He eventually told me he was busy in the time when I was pregnant. He did not specify exactly, but he became transparent.”
Dube helped Ndungane through this crisis, coaching her on how best to handle the situation and encouraging her and her husband to come into the clinic for counselling. “Most men don’t want to go to the clinic,” says Ndungane. “But the moment he got the counselling from them he realised … ‘I did something wrong … I have to put my family first.’”
He is now on ARVs and his viral load is undetectable.
“Now, I am fine,” says Ndungane, who is still HIV negative. “But without PrEP I would not be fine. I don’t want to lie.”
Ndungane only heard about the PrEP study’s imminent closure on the day the Guardian spoke to her. She remains hopeful that she and her husband will be able to get their medications “for ever”.
Sister Mqaba, who will be losing her job at the end of June, does not share the same optimism. “My fear is mortality is going to be very high,” she says. Mqaba knows what an uncontrolled epidemic looks like, having lived through the late 1990s and early 2000s, when infections were rife and no treatment was available. (Even after ART had been developed and used in the global north, South Africa’s president then, Thabo Mbeki, refused to provide it through the state health system.)
“In the bad days, you could diagnose people just by looking at them,” says Mqaba.
“They looked so sick. Now you don’t see that. But we are going to go back there. We are going to see mothers dying again, when they are pregnant or when they have just given birth. We are going to see babies born HIV positive.”
*Names have been changed
A bright spark in the Canadian team preparing the G7 Kananaskis summit, in the ridiculously beautiful Canadian Rockies, decided to insert the issue of wildfires onto a crowded agenda. It seemed an eminently sensible and Canadian thing for the eminently sensible Canadian prime minister, Mark Carney, to do.
After all there are currently an estimated 225 blazes in Canada, including 120 classified as out of control, and they are raging to the west in British Columbia across to northern parts of Alberta. Indeed it is likely to be Canada’s second worst year on record for wildfires. Moreover, Carney had an ingenious solution ready to hand – a Kananaskis wildfire charter including “greater equipment interoperability” between the G7 members.
But unfortunately wildfires were already on the G7 agenda, albeit in an altogether broader, even more existential sense. Not only was the world ablaze, but the human flame-thrower better known as the president of the United States would be in attendance and this would mean the whole two and a half days would leave Carney on one long wildfire watch. Equipment interoperability might not be enough if Trump suddenly ignited. The prospect of Trumpian explosions, fire alarms going off and spontaneous combustion understandably haunted the host’s planning. After all, It was Carney’s task as much as possible to make this annual showcase of western resolve and shared values appear as coherent as possible.
The last time Trump attended a G7 summit hosted by Canada he arrived late, insulted his host Justin Trudeau as weak, and then left the summit for Singapore, dispatching a message from Air Force One dissociating himself and the US from a painfully negotiated 28-point communique. Trudeau had been impudent enough to criticise Trump’s trade tariffs, Trump had discovered. It was one of the most disastrous conclusions to a G7 in the institution’s storied 50 years.
Carney faced a dilemma in how to prevent a repetition. He had just been elected prime minister by standing up to Trump. He could hardly treat Trump’s visit as some kind of homecoming to the 51st state. Nor could he or other members of the G7 pretend they did not resent the unresolved trade tariffs the president had imposed.
Carney’s solution is to let the issue of G7 members trade deals be handled primarily in bilateral talks, and to make the main agenda as consensual as possible.
With the kind of tact only a former central bank governor can muster, Carney has decided to try to minimise the threat of drama by constructing a mildly Canadian, deeply earnest, even soporific, agenda. Carney’s chosen topics for the summit are critical mineral supply chains, energy security, disinformation on the internet and, if things are becoming a little too animated, the global economic outlook and reform of the World Trade Organization. A discussion on “anti-market practices by large, non-G7 economies” – code for China – was promised by the Carney team. Not even Trump would be able to stage a walk out over quantum computing.
There would be no ambitious joint communique since that would be a wildfire attractant.
But for some experienced Trump watchers the Carney fireproof plan may yet fail.
First, Trump is easily bored. Everything has to happen SOON, or IMMEDIATELY. He likes to leave the world on tenterhooks; a deal is CLOSE or MAY NEVER HAPPEN. Above all, he likes to be the centre of attention and in none of these sessions, except for the one on artificial intelligence, was the president likely to be a lead character. When Trump gets bored he gets restless, and starts idly to play with matches. To liven things up, as a recent article in the Atlantic pointed out, he will fire off ill-tempered social-media posts, broadsides at policymakers, or premature declarations of victory, normally over an ally.
Sign up to First Thing
Our US morning briefing breaks down the key stories of the day, telling you what’s happening and why it matters
after newsletter promotion
Second, Carney knows, given the world is being remade in front of the G7 leaders’ eyes, harsh reality could not be kept from the entire summit.
At some point the only superpower in the room will be required to explain, in more than a tweet or a press conference aside, if he feels he has a duty to use diplomatic leverage over his allies in Moscow and Jerusalem, or is content to let events play out, with all the consequent and avoidable misery. Even the president of the United States can be made accountable sometimes.
Britons are braced for higher prices at the pumps after a rise in oil prices caused by the conflict between Israel and Iran in recent days.
Oil prices climbed in early trading on Monday as traders worried about the risks of a broader regional military conflict, which could disrupt supplies.
Iran is a big oil producer, and accounts for about 3% of global supplies.
As the conflict entered its fourth day, Brent crude rose by 0.5% in early trading,  pushing towards $75 a barrel, while US crude rose by 0.7% to $73.42.
But Brent later fell 3.4% at $71.70 a barrel amid reports that Iran is seeking talks with the US and Israel to end hostilities.
Tehran has asked Qatar, Saudi Arabia and Oman to press the US president, Donald Trump, to use his influence on Israel to agree to an immediate ceasefire with Iran, Reuters reported.
Crude prices jumped by more than 13% on Friday to their highest levels since January, and closed 7% higher for both benchmarks, after Israel hit more than 100 targets in Iran, including nuclear facilities and missile sites, and Iran responded with its own missile strikes on Israel.
Thomas Pugh, an economist at the consulting firm RSM UK, said: “Just as tensions and uncertainty around global trade and tariffs seemed to be easing with a deal between the US and China on tariffs, the Israel-Iran escalation represents a new source of geopolitical tension.
“The main way this will impact UK businesses and the economy is through higher oil and natural gas prices.”
He noted that oil prices had risen by about $10 a barrel in the past week, which is likely to result in a 5p increase in petrol and diesel prices at the pump over the “next couple of months”.
Petrol rose by a tenth of a penny, reaching an average of 132.1p a litre on Monday, according to the AA. If sustained, this increase would end three and a half months of falling petrol prices, starting from an average of 139.8p a litre in early March.
Wholesale petrol costs are above where they were in April and May but still way down on levels seen in the first quarter of this year. Aside from the oil price, another big factor that influences prices at UK pumps is US demand for gasoline during the summer motoring season, the AA said.
The sell-off in stock markets has been limited, so far. In London, the FTSE 100 gained 0.4%. Shares in the oil companies Shell and BP climbed by more than 1% before falling back. Stock markets in Germany and France rose by 0.7% and 0.9%.
“The market currently anticipates a limited conflict, though there is little indication that hostilities will end quickly,” said Jochen Stanzl, the chief market analyst at CMC Markets. “It is expected that fighting will continue unabated this week, albeit on a limited scale.”
Sign up to Business Today
Get set for the working day – we'll point you to all the business news and analysis you need every morning
after newsletter promotion
Mohamed El-Erian, an economic adviser to the insurance giant Allianz, said the conflict risked causing slower global growth, increased inflationary pressure, reduced “policy flexibility” for central banks, and “further gradual erosion of the global order”.
James Hosie, an analyst at Shore Capital, said the rise in Brent crude, to almost $75 a barrel, could be temporary, if the direct impact on Iran’s oil facilities remained limited.
Over the weekend, airstrikes by Israel targeted energy assets including the Shahran oil depot and Shahr Rey refinery close to Tehran, and the South Pars gas field. This raises the risk of a direct impact on Iran’s 2m barrels of oil exports a day.
There are fears that Iran’s next response could target regional energy supplies by disrupting tanker movements in the strait of Hormuz – the waterway off the south coast of the country through which 20% of global oil supplies and 20% of liquefied natural gas flow.
This would mark a significant escalation of the conflict, as it would affect exports from Saudi Arabia and other Middle Eastern oil and liquefied natural gas producers, along with their customers, particularly China, Hosie said.
However, he said other members of the Opec oil cartel and allies, notably Saudi Arabia, could raise oil production to offset any disruption to Iranian exports, and others such as US shale producers could also step in.
The price of oil had been well below the $80.53 a barrel average recorded last year before the conflict, with prices at the pump easing.
On the stage of the Amsterdam opera house, a Soviet-era block of flats is sliced open in a cross-section. In almost every apartment, a television set shows images of crowds at a rally, cheering a vast Russian flag emblazoned with the Z pro-war symbol.
Meanwhile, police bang on the doors looking for dissidents, while another big screen on the stage shows very different images, evocative and melancholic photographs of provincial Russia. As the lights go down at the end of the performance, the final image is of a van in a lonely parking lot, a coffin loaded into the back.
This contrast between the Russia portrayed on Kremlin-run TV channels and the real Russia is at the heart of a new production of Modest Mussorgsky’s opera Boris Godunov, staged by one of the country’s most feted film and theatre directors, Kirill Serebrennikov. It premiered this week in Amsterdam and draws on many of the exiled director’s own experiences in Russia.
Serebrennikov pulls the action of Mussorgsky’s brooding opera, which follows the reign and death of an ill-fated 17th-century Russian tsar, firmly into the present day. There are multiple implicit and explicit references to Vladimir Putin’s regime and the war in Ukraine.
In an interview, Serebrennikov said he had been working on his concept for the staging for more than five years, but had to radically rethink it after the full-scale invasion. “This is a story not just about tsars but about the people, and a lot has changed for the Russian people in the past five years,” he said.
The Russian people – the narod, in Russian – are given powerful choral music by Mussorgsky, and alternate between lamenting their lot and erupting in fury. Serebrennikov said he wanted to show that the narod, in the end, was made up of individuals and explore what responsibility they had for their situation.
“In Boris Godunov, the narod is usually portrayed as a mass, all standing in a line, a background for the tsar. And I wanted to see these people, see every individual in the crowd, whether they are old or young, healthy or sick. This crowd is made up of individual personalities, though of course, when they gather together or when there is a time of war they can quickly turn into an aggressive mass,” he said.
Serebrennikov’s narod are the residents of his on-stage apartment block. As the action unfolds, they get on with their lives: drinking, having sex, arguing, celebrating. Men sign up for the army, women mourn the loss of their relatives who have gone to fight. All the time, the television flickers in the background, imparting its propaganda.
In this production, the first aria of Tsar Boris is a televised New Year’s Eve broadcast from the Kremlin, stage-managed by aides and then beamed into every apartment. Mussorgsky’s scenes in which the rapacious Polish nobility plans to conquer Russia is also reimagined, as a primetime show called The Conspiracy, filmed complete with US flags and shown in the homes depicted onstage to frighten them into believing a western plot against them.
The only apartment not to have a television is the one belonging to the Holy Fool, a fleeting but important character in the opera, who laments the state of Russia and speaks truth to the tsar. Serebrennikov reimagines the fool as a modern-day dissident, and also gives the character a series of spoken monologues not in the original opera, selected and edited from the courtroom speeches of Soviet-era and modern-day Russian dissidents.
“Boris – this is my country, I don’t want to leave,” says the fool at one point, a dilemma experienced by many recent émigrés from Russia. “Many people have left, they have every right. But I ask myself, why am I the one who has to leave, and not you?”
The evocative images of the “real” Russia shown onstage come from the photographer Dmitry Markov. Serebrennikov, who was a friend, described him as “a phenomenal artist who shot Russia like nobody else did”. He commissioned Markov to shoot some scenes especially for the opera, but the photographer died last year, at the age of 41, before he was able to take the images, and Serebrennikov has devoted the production to him.
Sign up to This is Europe
The most pressing stories and debates for Europeans – from identity to economics to the environment
after newsletter promotion
Serebrennikov, who left Russia shortly after the full-scale invasion of Ukraine, had previously played an unusual role on the Moscow arts scene for many years, at once a provocative visionary and a darling of some in the elite. These contradictions came to a head in 2017, when he was accused of fraud and put under house arrest. His production of a ballet charting the life of the dancer Rudolf Nureyev was the hottest ticket of the season at the Bolshoi theatre. But when it opened in late 2017, with much of the Kremlin elite in attendance, the director was still under house arrest.
Since the invasion, these strange ambiguities have been ruthlessly ironed out of the Russian arts scene. Serebrennikov’s beloved theatre space, the Gogol Centre, was closed down, and many directors and actors have left Russia, unable to work in the new climate of rigid ideological orthodoxy.
Serebrennikov has called the war “a tragedy for Ukraine and a suicide for modern, open Russia”. He said with his Boris Godunov staging he wanted to explore the affects on Russian society of the brutal war.
“We see that the external aggression against another country also has an unexpected vector inside the country, people attacking each other. This is about physical violence and emotional violence, everything from domestic abuse to crime and murders. It’s about self-destruction, and that is what I wanted to make this opera about: how a thoughtless and senseless existence in the environment created by the authorities can lead to self-destruction,” he said.
It is a bleak vision, and Serebrennikov does not leave much room for hope, either in the opera’s grim finale or in his own thoughts about the future of Russia.
“Some people like to live with illusions, to live in hope. To say: ‘Everything will turn out OK.’ I don’t really understand this idea of hope and I don’t like to play these games. Why will everything turn out OK? Where is the evidence for this view? I believe in taking conscious, thought-through decisions, in trying to grasp and understand the reality as it is,” he said.
UN peacekeepers should be routinely deployed to protect aid convoys from attack in places such as Gaza and Sudan, a senior United Nations expert has proposed.
With starvation increasingly used as a weapon of war, Michael Fakhri said armed UN troops were now required to ensure that food reached vulnerable populations.
“I’m calling for the UN general assembly to authorise peacekeepers to accompany humanitarian convoys,” said the UN’s special rapporteur on the right to food.
Fakhri’s call for intervention comes amid deepening concern over the increased targeting of aid convoys in Africa and the Middle East.
The UN’s human rights office said it was “deeply disturbed” by the rising number of attacks, warning that any attempt to block aid or target humanitarians was a war crime.
Recently, humanitarian convoys have been deliberately targeted in Central African Republic and also in Haiti in the Caribbean.
Earlier this month, a UN aid convoy of 15 trucks – the first attempt to reach the besieged Sudanese city of El Fasher for a year – was attacked, killing five people.
The most high-profile obstruction of aid, however, involves the Gaza Strip. Three months ago, Israel imposed a full humanitarian blockade on Gaza, cutting off food and other critical supplies to the Palestinian territory. Aid convoys entering Gaza have also been repeatedly attacked.
Fakhri said that unless there was concerted international intervention to protect aid delivery throughout the world, humanitarian organisations would eventually cease distribution, creating a “dystopia”.
He said the UN security council, which passed a resolution in 2018 condemning the unlawful denial of aid to civilians, had been rendered ineffective because members kept vetoing attempts to help.
“Where the security council is blocked by a veto, the general assembly has the authority to call for peacekeepers,” said Fakhri.
He said such a move could happen quickly with a majority vote of the 193 member states required – a proportion that Fakhri predicted would easily be reached.
“What the general assembly would do is politically implement what countries are already obliged to do.”
Frustration over the lack of international action to safeguard vital aid supplies – particularly in Gaza – has forced activists to take matters into their own hands.
Last week, a yacht attempted to break the Israeli blockade and deliver aid to Gaza but was prevented by Israel.
On the same day the boat was intercepted, a land aid convoy set off from Tunisia with the similar intention of breaking Israel’s blockade of humanitarian aid for the Palestinian territory.
In Africa, aid delivery in Sudan has become increasingly fraught as key routes are blocked or attacked while aid facilities and humanitarian workers have been targeted.
Jeremy Laurence, a Geneva-based spokesperson for the UN human rights office, said: “We are deeply disturbed by the intentional obstruction of aid trying to reach civilians from Gaza to Sudan and elsewhere, including through attacks on aid convoys.
“Worryingly, these practices appear to be on the increase,” Laurence said. “Wilfully impeding relief supplies to starve civilians as a method of warfare is a war crime.”
Meanwhile, Human Rights Watch described as “horrifying” the spike in the frequency and severity of attacks on humanitarian workers.
Louis Charbonneau, United Nations director at HRW, said:“Last year set a grim record for the number of humanitarian workers killed in conflict zones – more than 360 – most of them in Gaza but also in Sudan, Ukraine and elsewhere.”
Fakhri added: “Whoever controls aid has a significant amount of power in a particular region and conflict.”
He warned that if attacks continued then traditional aid distributors such as the UN could be forced to give up.
“It makes it less likely for the UN, for the international community, for the Red Cross, for civil society organisations, to do that work and then who will take over? These militarised operations seen in Gaza?” he said.
Fakhri was referring to the Gaza Humanitarian Foundation (GHF), a US and Israel-backed logistics group that aims to replace Gaza’s UN-led food and humanitarian supply distribution network.
Last Wednesday, Israeli forces killed at least 60 Palestinians in Gaza who were seeking food from a GHF distribution centre, with dozens more wounded.
Charbonneau urged greater justice for attacks on humanitarians and aid convoys. “One big motivator is impunity, which emboldens the governments of Israel, Russia, the warring parties in Sudan and others to target or fire indiscriminately at civilians, including humanitarian workers,” he said. “The problem is they feel confident they can get away with it.”
About as inside-baseball for visual arts as you can get, Mariano Llinás’s three-part portrait of Argentinian art collective Mondongo is knackering, infuriating and, infuriatingly, often brilliant – especially in its more sincere second instalment. The film nominally tries to document Mondongo’s 2021 Baptistery of Colours project, in which the artists catalogued the chromatic spectrum with plasticine blocks inside a dodecahedron chapel. But it quickly snowballs into Llinás’s own scattershot inquiry into colour and portraiture, a tone poem that ceaselessly interrogates its own tones, a crisis of faith about representation, and – as he falls out with artists Juliana Laffitte and Manuel Mendanha – a droll depiction of a director’s nervous breakdown.
As Laffitte lets fly at him at one point, Llinás can never resist the urge to interrupt with his latest brainwave. By quoting one critic referencing his previous 13-hour portmanteau from 2018, the director pre-empts any criticism of the almost five-hour work in front of us: “You get the feeling he doesn’t know what to do next, and the solution he’s found is to autodestruct.” But this impish postmodernism quickly darkens in the Triptych’s first part, titled El Equilibrista (The Tightrope Walker); soundtracking Mondongo’s colour classification to bursts of music from Psycho and Vertigo, he seems disturbed by their quest to break down art into its constituent elements. This strand alternates with another in which an art historian attempts to document Mondongo’s process; both are constantly intercut with excerpts of Llinás’s documentary script, him revealing the canvas on which he is daubing his own strokes.
Llinás redeems this lugubrious introduction in the second part, Retrato de Mondongo (Portrait of Mondongo), which begins with him pitching the film to Laffitte and Mendanha as a duel about their respective ideas of colour. His extends the emotional pitch to the elements from which film is constructed, like the stabs of Bernard Herrmann, or his own incorrigible addiction to metatextuality.
But as he digs himself in deeper – redramatising his arguments with Mondongo, inflicting on us the writing of a long prose poem about his aesthetics – something breaks. Laffitte dresses him down about his egoism, saying it amounts to a form of “evil”. He sheds a solitary tear. Lost in midlife “tempest” about how to best represent reality, he admits nostalgia for “feverish nights” with Mondongo in the early 2000s, when he shared their sense of purpose. (Their portraits in plasticine, wood and other materials are indeed very beautiful.) It turns out the arch-maximalist pines for the simplicity of la bohème.
Alas, this Argentinian size queen can’t just leave it there. He has to give us part three, Kunst der Farbe (named for the 1961 manual on colour by Johannes Itten that inspired Mondongo’s project). Adding the proviso that it is his unfinished contribution to the duel, he’s right about it being a failure. Broken down into eight colour-coded subsections with pretentious titles such as Green or the Conclave of the Ancient Plant Bishops, most are pedantic montages with little insight into the hue in question. Llinás hams it up as a monocled Fritz Lang majordomo overseeing the farrago but this adds little; only traditional documentary-style commentary from his colourist offers any worthwhile perspective.
If nothing else, the third part serves as a reminder that form can never divest itself entirely of content. Jokey deconstruction of directorial megalomania though it may be, The Triptych of Mondongo is compelling only when Llinás gets candid about his insecurities. But the buffoonery does have the odd moment: his cameraman Agustín – the Sancho Panza to this rainbow-dazzled Quixote – repeatedly screaming “I represented Argentina well!” as their hound barks along sums up this art-theory dog’s dinner.
 The Triptych of Mondongo is at the ICA, London, from 19 June.
America reached its apex of self-parody shortly after 7pm on 14 June 2025. In that moment, the background band at Donald Trump’s military parade segued from Jump by Van Halen to Fortunate Son by Creedence Clearwater Revival, just after the announcer explained that M777 howitzers are made out of titanium.
Nobody, apparently, had considered the lyrics: “Some folks are born, made to wave the flag, they’re red, white and blue, and when the band plays Hail to the Chief, they point the cannon at you.” If this was some kind of surreptitious protest by the musicians, I salute them, but given the time and the place, sheer obliviousness is a better explanation. The crowd, pretty thin, did their best imitation of a cheer.
The US clearly does not know how to do an authoritarian military parade. To be fair, they are just getting started. Authoritarian military parades are supposed to project invincible strength. They are supposed to make your own people impressed with the inhuman discipline of your troops, and to strike fear into your enemies at the capacity of your organization. In Trump’s parade, the soldiers resembled children forced to participate in a half-assed school play, trying to figure out how to avoid embarrassment as far as possible, and the military itself looked better suited to running a Kid Rock tour than a country’s defence.
But do not confuse Trump’s debased parade with a joke or an innocent piece of entertainment. The Trump parade took place in the immediate aftermath of the assassination of Melissa Hortman, a Minnesota state representative. While it was under way, security forces were firing teargas on protesters in Los Angeles.
Violence is coming to define American political life – spectacular violence including the parade and real violence like the assassination of Hortman. Political destabilization is arriving far too quickly to be perceived in its entirety. So much is happening so fast that it’s impossible to keep track of the decline. Increasingly, the question is becoming: when are we going to start calling this what it is?
When I published my book The Next Civil War in 2022, the US was very far from the threshold of what the experts at the Peace Research Institute Oslo defined as civil war, which is 1,000 combatant deaths a year. They defined civil conflict as 25 deaths a year, so the US already fits comfortably in that category. But the definitions of war and conflict never applied perfectly to the American reality, because it is so much bigger and so much more geographically diverse than other countries. As we start to see violence overtaking American political life, the transition is more like a sunset than a light switch. Every day violence becomes more and more settled as the means of US politics.
The parade, and the “No Kings” counter-protests, were both distractions from the fact that American political life is moving away from discourse altogether. Don’t like what the senators of the other party are saying? Handcuff them. Don’t like protesters? Send in the marines. Don’t like the makeup of the House of Representatives in Minnesota? Kill the top Democrat. The political purpose of the parade, from Trump’s point of view, was to demonstrate his mastery of the means of violence. He needed to show, to the military and to the American people, that he can make the army do what he tells it, and established traditions and the rule of law will not alter his will.
But the primary effect of the parade was to demonstrate an immense weakness, in Trump and in the American people. It was a parade reminiscent of the most vacuous regimes in history. In 1977, Jean-Bédel Bokassa, the leader of the Central African Republic, declared himself emperor and indulged in a coronation that imitated the coronation of Napoleon I in immaculate detail. He even went so far as to use eight white Norman horses to pull the carriage, but the French horses were not used to the climate and several died. Trump’s parade felt like a lazier version of that.
The spectre of defeat hovered over the entire celebration of supposed strength. The last time the US military threw a parade was 1991, which was the last time they triumphed over an opponent, the last time their war machine produced the results they had been attempting. The US has not won a war since then. But hey, if you can’t win a war, at least you can throw a parade.
Except they couldn’t even throw a parade! The end of the show was almost too perfect. A frail Lee Greenwood, a country singer long past his “best before” date, sang God Bless America raggedly, lousily. “Our flag still stands for freedom,” he sang. “They can’t take that away.” Oh can’t they? Trump at the center fidgeted like a rich kid bored with his servants and toys. The whole business was like watching some sordid fairytale: the unloved boy who everybody hated grew up to force the American people to throw him a birthday party and give him a flag. And then almost nobody came.
What’s true of men is also true of countries: the more they need to show off how strong they are, the weaker they are. The weakness, rather than the strength, is terrifying. Whoever is so scared and so needy as to need that parade is capable of anything. That goes for Trump, and that goes for his country.
Stephen Marche is the author of The Next Civil War
Foreign investment into the US could be threatened by Donald Trump’s new “revenge” taxes, analysts have warned.
A provision within the president’s One Big Beautiful Bill Act will allow the US to apply higher taxes on foreign individuals, businesses and investors connected to jurisdictions that impose “unfair foreign taxes” on US individuals and companies.
Companies listed on the London Stock Exchange could choose to avoid the measure by redomiciling in New York.
Section 899, as it is called, classes digital service taxes and “diverted profits taxes” as unfair, along with any taxes that target US entities. It would allow US authorities to impose an additional tax starting at 5% and increasing by five percentage points annually, up to 20%.
Max Yoeli, a senior research fellow in the US and the Americas programme at Chatham House, says section 899 “threatens to further alienate foreign investors”.
It could chill investment into the US by calling into question its “fundamental openness”, he added in a comment piece.
The Italian bank UniCredit agrees that section 899 could further damage foreign investor sentiment towards US dollar-denominated assets. It could backfire on the US, it says, given the large amount of domestic assets held by foreigners.
“The list of countries that would fall into this category is long and encompasses most European countries, including Italy and Germany,” UniCredit told clients, saying that foreign investors had more than doubled their holdings of US assets over the past decade.
“Not only would this additional tax serve to finance corporate tax reductions, but it would also likely be used as a negotiating tool for the US in trade deals, especially as Republicans seem willing to withdraw from the global minimum tax framework.”
UniCredit also fears the dollar’s safe haven status could be undermined if there are fresh tax disputes between the US and other countries.
The One Big Beautiful Bill Act was passed by the US House of Representatives last month. The Senate is yet to approve the bill, with the White House setting a deadline of 4 July.
George Saravelos, the global head of FX research at Deutsche Bank, warned last month that section 899 could allow the US administration to transform its trade war into a capital war by “explicitly using taxation on foreign holdings of US assets as leverage to further US economic goals”.
UK companies could certainly fall foul of section 899, as Britain operates a digital services tax aimed at tech multinationals, and a diverted profits tax designed to clamp down on tax avoidance by multinationals.
Sign up to Business Today
Get set for the working day – we'll point you to all the business news and analysis you need every morning
after newsletter promotion
Goldman Sachs has calculated that UK corporates are “particularly exposed” to section 899, as roughly 30% of the revenues of companies listed on the FTSE 100 are generated in the US.
However, as companies that are majority-owned by US shareholders are exempt, City bosses may consider moving their stock market listing to New York, to dodge section 899.
“This ownership dynamic not only mitigates tax risk but also reinforces the strategic case for relisting in the US, where investor bases are deeper and more aligned with US revenue exposure,” the Goldman Sachs analysts said.
According to Goldman, the large UK companies with the most significant exposure to the US, and who are not majority-owned by US investors, are the media group Pearson, the business services group Experian, the pest control business Rentokil and the pharmaceuticals manufacturer Hikma.
Ashtead Group, Compass and Melrose also generate a large proportion of their sales stateside, but as they have majority US ownership they should be exempt from section 899.
French companies could also be at risk, as Paris operates a digital services tax on the revenues that large tech companies generate in France.
There are two ways of looking at events in the Middle East over the past year and a half. One is that the response to 7 October 2023 was a break from the past. The attack by Hamas triggered an Israeli response so vengeful that it has been impossible to fit within the boundaries set by international laws or contain geographically – the genocide in Gaza, the invasion of southern Lebanon, the occupation of the buffer zone in southwestern Syria and airstrikes across that country, and now its attacks against Iran.
Then there is the explanation that these events are part of a historical continuum. Regional peace was the result of a volatile status quo that was always vulnerable to disruption. It only looked tenable because it relied on a variety of factors that, working together, looked like a settlement. This fine balance has been tipped by an Israeli government that is now fixated on pursuing its own agenda, singlehandedly rewriting the future of the region in ways that it is unable to explain and unwilling to control.
One of the elements of this brittle peace was the presence of the Gulf powers as mediators. Gulf rapprochement with Iran was not motivated by trade or fellow feeling, but rather the pragmatic need for stability. Some Gulf states also crossed a historic red line and either recognised Israel with the signing of the Abraham accords or began a process of normalisation. Now these countries find themselves caught between two feuding sides and at risk of alienating Israel’s main ally, the US, with whom it has close military and economic ties.
The status quo also relied on suppressing Palestinian rights to a degree that everyone was happy with; everyone except the Palestinians, of course. In a sense, the Palestinian problem had also been neutralised. When the assault on Gaza began, it exposed Israel’s views and intentions to the world, raising the spectre of a new Nakba. It also brought Iran and its proxies, Hezbollah and the Houthis of Yemen, into play as defenders of Palestinian rights. Once Iran entered the frame, and Israel felt empowered to act without break or censure, there was no going back.
Something else has snapped – justification for Israel’s actions has been stretched beyond plausibility. With the safety of Jewish people as the rationale for unbridled support, and Israel’s importance as a close partner in a strategic region, the US and other allies have provided carte blanche for the country to defend itself. But this relies on Israel responding to any threats in a proportional way, so as not to create further instability. Israel has not only responded inappropriately to threats, it has weaponised them to such an extent that it has become a primary factor in its own insecurity, and that of the rest of the region.
Backing from allies also relies on transparency between the camps. The colossal military, economic and political cover is provided on the understanding that whoever is in charge of the Israeli government has no other motives for engaging in conflict other than securing safety for its citizens. Trust has been broken by the current prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, who is using the war to bolster public support for his own political career. He is not only making Israelis less safe, but further capitalising on that insecurity as he plays the role of protector.
Relations with key allies were being put to the test over Gaza as public pressure from within western countries grew, fed by constant images of starving children, charred hospitals and row after row of body bags. By opening a new front and engaging another enemy, the Israeli government has a chance at both restoring the terms of its pact with its sponsors, and the historical narrative that it is the victim, acting in irreproachable good faith. Here it is, once again in need of support, suffering strikes and civilian casualties at the hands of a belligerent neighbour.
Stories of people dying of starvation in Gaza or of the hungry being killed while queueing for food, have fallen away from the headlines. The relentless assault on the West Bank and the expansion of illegal settlements has receded from view. The pressure that was beginning to build on Israel to let in more aid and honour a ceasefire has been replaced with the same mealy-mouthed defences that we saw in the early days of the war in Gaza, plus the same pabulum of urging “restraint”. The clock is reset.
Regarding the strikes on Iran, Israel appears to have drawn upon the lessons of the Iraq war, claiming it has acted in defence on the basis of intelligence that the world has to take on trust. How imminent was the threat? Who has the right to decide when a “pre-emptive strike” is justified? And who has the right to respond to an illegal unilateral attack? What we do know so far is that global politics is run on the basis of exceptions and different benchmarks of sovereignty. Yes, Iran has violated its nuclear non-proliferation obligations, but Israel refused to sign up to them altogether.
These distinctions in the past could be more easily smoothed over, because Israel and the US were “the good guys”, and Iran was part of an “axis of evil”. But the erosion of Israel’s and the US’s credibility as honest interlocutors, wise in their security considerations and compliant with international law, has made these campaigns less straightforward.
Here is the real war that Israel is fighting. Iran still retains a measure of political will and military capability that is too high for comfort for Israel. And so as the window of Israeli credibility closes, it becomes more necessary for it to diminish Iran’s political credibility and military capabilities. But what is the endgame? Does Israel envisage a close-ended campaign, after which it retreats, satisfied with the results? Or is that not a plausible scenario, considering the counterstrikes it has provoked. It’s all looking very Gaza-like: escalation with no end; or regime change with no plan.
Both Israel’s campaigns – the propaganda one and the one on the ground – share one thing: they regard the Middle East as a theatre for domestic politics, reputation management and experimentation in bringing about “safety” on yet-to-be-defined terms. But the region is not just Israel’s back yard. It is other people’s homes and they have their own politics, histories, populations and security needs that, increasingly, are subject to a country that has decided that only its own agenda matters.
Nesrine Malik is a Guardian columnist.
More than 80 charity leaders and campaigners have written to Keir Starmer urging him to attend a UN global development conference and back plans to reduce the debt payments made by poor countries.
World leaders including the French president, Emmanuel Macron, and the Canadian prime minister, Mark Carney, and the European Commission president, Ursula von der Leyen, are expected at the Financing for Development conference – known as FfD4 - in Seville later this month.
The campaigners claim that in negotiations between participating countries, the UK, together with others including the US, has blocked proposals for a new UN intergovernmental process to tackle the debt crisis in the global south.
Signatories to the letter include the heads of Christian Aid, Oxfam GB, Save the Children UK, ActionAid and Unicef UK.
“We are deeply concerned about the UK’s position to systematically block any significant reform of the debt architecture within the FfD4 negotiations thus far. This approach risks putting this government on the wrong side of history and risks further damaging the UK’s reputation as a development partner,” it says.
The development minister Jenny Chapman has insisted the UK will continue to take a lead on international development, despite slashing the aid budget to fund higher defence spending. Under its party manifesto, Labour pledged to “repair relationships with developing countries and to restore the UK’s role on the international development stage”.
Romilly Greenhill, the chief executive of the aid umbrella group Bond, which coordinated the letter, said: “Following the shortsighted decision to cut the UK aid budget, this government has a responsibility to step up and take decisive action on debt.”
She added: “The UK must stand in solidarity with countries hardest hit by the unjust debt crisis. Supporting their calls is vital – not just for the global majority, but for a fairer, more stable future for everyone.”
Patrick Watt, the chief executive of Christian Aid, said: “The UK cannot build real partnerships with the global south while blocking the very reforms those countries are calling for. At FfD4, the government has a choice: stand in solidarity with countries facing debt and climate crises, or cling to outdated power structures that continue to extract more than they give.”
The letter calls on Starmer to “ensure that the UK government demonstrates that it is ready to lead on debt on the global stage” by supporting the idea of a UN process. “This is urgently needed for agreeing just, timely, and lasting debt relief and preventing future debt crises,” the letter adds.
With the UK a common jurisdiction for the contracts that govern sovereign debt, the government is also being urged to pass legislation to force private sector creditors to bear their fair share of any debt relief programmes.
The letter to Starmer says: “Reforming UK debt legislation and supporting global financial reform costs the UK taxpayer nothing, all that is required is your willingness to lead.”
The World Bank estimates more than half of low-income countries are either already in debt distress or at high risk of it, and its chief economist has warned that outside Asia, the developing world risks becoming “a development-free zone”.
Sign up to Business Today
Get set for the working day – we'll point you to all the business news and analysis you need every morning
after newsletter promotion
Countries struggling to meet their debt obligations can already apply for relief through a process known as the common framework, which is administered by the International Monetary Fund, but critics complain that it can take years.
A UK government spokesperson said: “We remain deeply committed to supporting developing countries to tackle unsustainable debt and continue to work with them to address both the immediate challenges, and the underlying drivers.
“We look forward to working through a full spectrum of development finance issues, alongside our partners at the conference in Seville later this month.”
They spokesperson added that the UK would be represented by a minister at the meeting.
Global efforts to tackle poverty have taken a significant blow from the deep cuts in overseas aid budgets made by Donald Trump’s administration, which has all but dismantled its aid agency, USAID.
Slick Rick is tucking into a late room-service breakfast in his Park Lane hotel room. He is back in London, the city his family emigrated from when he was a boy, because he’s launching a new album, Victory, his first since 1999’s The Art of Storytelling, which featured an array of guest artists – including Outkast, Nas and Snoop Dogg – paying homage to one of hip-hop’s legendary figures.
Even today, he remains the rapper’s rapper, the most-sampled hip-hop artist in history. Ghostface Killah has called him the greatest of all time. Eminem described himself as “a product of Slick Rick”, Jay-Z likened him to Matisse and Mark Ronson once gave a Ted talk dissecting his work. Questlove called his voice “the most beautiful thing to happen to hip-hop culture”.
So what has he been doing for the last 26 years? He’s keen to point out that he’s been busy. There was a lengthy battle with US immigration (he was granted American citizenship in 2016); guest appearances on tracks by Jay-Z, Missy Elliott and Mariah Carey among others; collaborations with fashion brands; a real estate empire to tend to. A smart cookie, Slick Rick invested his 80s earnings in property in the Bronx in New York City, the downside of which, “delinquent tenants and such”, is explored in an exasperated track on Victory called Landlord. But it took a meeting with actor Idris Elba “at a celebrity-type party thing” to bring a new album to life: Victory was recorded at Elba’s homes in London and Paris. Uniquely among his catalogue, the results lean into the former Ricky Walters’s British roots: UK rapper Giggs makes a guest appearance, as does Estelle, and the accompanying videos were shot in south London.
The bracelet on his wrist is platinum and enormous, his watch definitely warrants the description “iced out” but, by Slick Rick’s standards at least, he’s dressed down. The patch that covers his right eye, injured by glass from a broken window when he was two, is just an eye patch, rather than the jewel-encrusted variety that has become his trademark (Sotheby’s sold one of them last year for $25,000), and there’s no sign of his famous neck chains complete with vast pendants.
On a day when he’s feeling more flamboyant, Slick Rick looks as if he’s wearing a jewellery store’s entire window display around his neck. It’s a style he says he borrowed from mid-80s drug dealers in Baychester, the neighbourhood of the Bronx to which his family relocated from Mitcham in 1976, seeking a better life. “Crack cocaine was everywhere, and people that was getting rich off crack had enormous jewellery and nice cars and pretty girls – it was like they were giants. Once you get past the stigma of it being bad, you can harvest the beauty out of what you saw. When we saw the jewellery looking like that, it was like, ‘You can’t go back to small. You can’t go back to gold with no diamonds on it.”
No, he frowns, he’s not dialling his look down now he’s reached his 60s. Quite the opposite: he heads to his bedroom and returns with a huge, diamond-encrusted medallion featuring the Virgin Mary. “You’re selling yourself, you know what I mean? Let’s say you ain’t made a record in 26 years – you’re like an old, washed-up, broke motherfucker, do you know what I mean? But when you present yourself like that, it makes people look at you different: ‘Oh, I thought you was a broke ass’. The music eventually catches up, but in the meantime, you sell yourself.”
Selling his image is something Slick Rick’s proved exceptionally good at: in the US you can buy not just Slick Rick T-shirts, but Halloween costumes, even rugs. Not that there was any danger of it overshadowing his music.
He was like no one else in mid-80s hip-hop. Rapping in a soft, conversational, singsong voice, he sounded less like someone addressing an audience than a man telling a particularly ornamented anecdote, with one eyebrow permanently raised at the absurdity of it all. It just came out that way, he says: “At the time, I was probably the only English rapper, but I mixed it with an American accent, because I’m trying to be cool.” And indeed there’s something slightly disconcerting about meeting Slick Rick, at least if you’ve spent the last 40 years listening to his work: in conversation, he sounds exactly like he does on record.
He says that moving from Mitcham to the Bronx was a culture shock – “it was like being in Disneyland or something, more variety of music, food, cultures” – but equally he was in the right place at the right time. In his early teens, hip-hop’s first stirrings swept Black neighbourhoods in the Bronx. He can remember seeing the Cold Crush Brothers performing in a local park – “four or five of them, two DJs, choreographed dance steps, it was just beautiful to us” – and the disappointment of hearing the first hip-hop singles. “They didn’t sound like they did in the streets.”
By then, he had his own group, the Kangol Crew, with their own look – “the Kangol hat with a little suit jacket, we was popular in school because we stood out”. But really, he says, it was “just kids banging on the desks and making up rhymes, like competing with each other to make the team laugh”. Still, it was the root of his distinctive approach to writing: rather than just bragging, he took to writing stories, illuminating them by taking on characters and adopting different voices. He says he got the latter idea from the children’s records by Alvin and the Chipmunks, on which actor Ross Bagdasarian would manipulate tapes of his voice to create characters, effectively holding conversations with himself, although Slick Rick’s characters and stories were infinitely more outrageous. “That was just me entertaining my age group. Later, critics said it was misogynistic or whatever, but if you’re trying to entertain children your age, that’s going to come with it. You’re not going to nitpick and chip away at it – don’t use that word, don’t use this word – because you’ll mess up the humour.”
His real break came when he entered a talent contest at a local club called The Armoury: one of the judges was Doug E Fresh, already making a name for himself as “the original human beatbox”: they teamed up and started making tapes together. “Then someone leaked the tapes to the radio and they just got so popular that a record label thought they should put it out, and then … it went international.”
It certainly did: credited to Doug E Fresh and the Get Fresh Crew, 1985’s The Show sold 1m copies in the US and reached the Top 10 in Britain. But it was the B-side, La Di Da Di, that cast the longest shadow: a lengthy shaggy dog story and showcase for MC Ricky D (as he was then known), packed with endlessly quotable lines, it’s subsequently been sampled more than 1,200 times, by virtually every major rapper – from 2Pac to Kanye West, Run-DMC to Tyler, the Creator – and a dizzying array of non-hip-hop artists: La Di Da Di is probably the only thing the oeuvre of Miles Davis shares with that of the Vengaboys, or indeed BTS. It’s provided the hook for the Notorious BIG’s Hypnotize, the chorus for Miley Cyrus’s We Can’t Stop and a melancholy counterpoint on Lana Del Rey’s Doin’ Time. It rumbles in the background of Beyoncé’s Party, was covered in its entirety by Snoop Dogg – whose vocal style owes a considerable debt to Slick Rick’s – and Robbie Williams borrowed its lyrics on Rock DJ. “It draws people in,” suggests Rick of its longevity. “It’s like watching a half-hour comedy special or something. And it taught the kids that they could go in another direction – ‘[other hip-hop] is just braggadocious, you can go this way too’.”
His solo debut album The Great Adventures of Slick Rick was a platinum seller, spawning more heavily sampled classics in Hey Young World and Children’s Story, which subsequently formed the basis of Montell Jordan’s This Is How We Do It and TLC’s Creep, respectively. Then everything went wrong.
A cousin, hired as a bodyguard, attempted to extort money from him: when he was let go, he threatened to kill the rapper and his mother. The situation escalated, shots were fired, and Slick Rick was convicted of attempted murder, serving five years (he was given a full pardon in 2008). He recorded two more albums, 1991’s The Ruler’s Back and 1994’s Behind Bars, while on bail or day release. He doesn’t want to talk about his jail time today, nor does he mention either of those albums in the list of achievements he enumerates on Victory (“They were rushed, made on bail. I didn’t reach my full potential. I don’t want to undercut my audience with filler tracks,” he shrugs) although Behind Bars in particular has some stellar moments. The heartbreaking All Alone (No One to Be With) presses his classic storytelling into the service of a song about a single mother’s life going haywire, and the chilling title track is, as he puts it, “a child’s imagination of what everybody perceives jail to be – dangerous, you might get raped, you might get extorted”.
It is undoubtedly a peculiar situation: an artist who has exerted a vast influence on hip-hop, while only releasing five albums in a 41-year career, two of which he disowns. But Slick Rick seems noticeably more interested in showing me his design for a platform-soled version of the Clarks Wallabee shoe – “it’s modern, it’s perfect,” he enthuses – than he is in discussing his legacy. “It doesn’t matter. You just live your life and then let it resonate how it resonates, let it inspire how it inspires. I’m not really looking for a legacy or nothing like that. Just let it happen how it happens, OK?”
It’s probably an easy thing to say when you know your fellow rappers have spent decades calling you a legend, but no matter: the great Slick Rick shakes my hand, and returns his attention to his sausage and eggs.
 Victory is out now on 7Wallace/Mass Appeal
An innovative plan to use public money to back renewable energy loans in the developing world could liberate cash from the private sector for urgently needed climate finance.
Avinash Persaud, a special adviser on climate change to the president of the Inter-American Development Bank (IADB), who developed the proposals, believes the plan could drive tens of billions of new investment in the fledgling green economy in poorer countries within a few years, and could provide the bulk of the $1.3tn in annual climate finance promised to the developing world by 2035.
“This could be an engine for green growth, and produce the trillions needed for climate finance in the future,” he told the Guardian. “It could be a transformation.”
His ideas will be set out in detail at a UN meeting in Germany this week, kicking off negotiations for the Cop30 climate summit that will take place in Brazil this November against a worrying global background for the discussions.
Having missed a deadline in February, the world’s largest economies still need to submit plans for their greenhouse gas emissionsbefore the Brazil summit, but so far only a few have done do so.
But research seen by the Guardian, carried out by the campaign group Oil Change International, shows that many developed countries are still planning to expand their extraction of oil and gas, despite promising at Cop28 in 2023 to “transition away from fossil fuels”.
The analysis found that the US, Canada, Norway and Australia were responsible for 70% of projected new oil and gas expansion in 2025-35.
Romain Ioualalen, the global policy lead at Oil Change International, said: “It is sickening that countries with the highest incomes and outsized historical responsibility for causing the climate crisis are planning massive oil and gas expansion with no regard for the lives and livelihoods at stake.”
At the two-week meeting in Bonn, which ends on 26 June, the vital issue of finance for developing countries – which they need in order to cut their emissions and cope with the impacts of extreme weather – will also come to the fore.
The proposals by Persaud and others to buy up loans to renewable energy projects in the developing world could allow billions of dollars of private sector cash to flood the sector, in a big boost to global climate finance.
The plan, which is being pioneered by the IADB, would involve getting taxpayer-funded development banks to buy existing loans to green projects in poor countries, which would free up investment from private sector lenders.
Such loans are relatively low risk because they are already performing – but because they are in developing countries, with credit ratings lower than those of rich states – mainstream private sector investors such as pension funds are often forbidden from touching them because of their strict rules on credit worthiness.
But if those loans are backed instead by development banks, which can provide guarantees against default, and which themselves have impeccable credit ratings, the “repackaged” loan finance can meet private sector criteria.
“The lightbulb moment was realising there was $50bn in performing green loans in Latin America,” said Persaud, a former adviser to Barbados’s prime minister, Mia Mottley, who has championed climate finance. “Why not buy that to enable new projects to be created?”
Key to the concept is that when the loans are bought up by the development banks, which pay a small premium to the current private sector creditors that own the loans, the originators of the renewable energy projects must agree to use the finance they gain access to in new projects.
This creates a “virtuous circle”, by which when the loans are bought up, developers – who already have expertise in setting up successful renewable energy schemes – seek new opportunities, which leads to further investment.
IADB is working on launching the programme now, and is expected to send a request for proposals within the next few months, before Cop30. The initial portfolio of loans is likely to be about $500m to £1bn.
Several private and public sector experts said Persaud’s ideas could have a big impact.
Mattia Romani, a senior partner at Systemiq, a consultancy that is working with Cop30 on climate finance, said: “It is a very powerful initiative, both pragmatic and innovative. Given the constraints we will inevitably face in the coming years, securitisation is one of the few realistic tools to reach [the sums needed].
“This initiative is designed to unlock institutional capital by leveraging the balance sheets of domestic commercial banks – securitising their loans so that they can meet the fiduciary needs of institutional investors, and turning them into engines for transition finance. What’s new is the direct engagement with local banks – we are starting with a pilot in Latin America.”
Iranian missiles have struck Israeli cities of Tel Aviv and Haifa, destroying homes and fuelling concerns among world leaders at this week’s G7 meeting that the conflict between the two regional enemies could lead to a broader Middle East war.
Israel’s Magen David Adom (MDA) emergency service said Monday that four people were pronounced dead after strikes at four sites in central Israel, with 87 injured. The dead were two women and two men, all approximately 70 years old, the MDA said.
 Authorities in the central Israeli city of Petah Tikva near Tel Aviv said that Iranian missiles had hit a residential building there, charring concrete walls, blowing out windows and heavily damaging multiple apartments.
Search and location operations were under way in the northern port city of Haifa where about 30 people were wounded, emergency authorities said, as dozens of first responders rushed to the strike zones. Fires were seen burning at a power plant near the port, media reported.
Iranian state TV said the country fired at least 100 missiles at Israel, signalling that it had no intention of yielding to international calls for de-escalation as it pressed on with its retaliation for Israel’s surprise attack on Tehran’s nuclear programme and military leadership on Friday.
Iran’s Revolutionary Guards claimed the latest attack employed a new method that caused Israel’s multi-layered defence systems to target each other. The Guardian was unable to verify this claim. The Israeli military did not immediately respond to a request for comment on the strikes. Israeli officials have repeatedly said the defence system is not 100% infallible and warned of tough days ahead.
Israeli strikes on Iran on Sunday killed the intelligence chief of the country’s Revolutionary Guards, Mohammad Kazemi, along with two other officers, Iran’s IRNA state media news agency reported.
Late on Sunday the Israeli military said that it was striking surface-to-surface missile sites in Iran.
Images from Tehran showed the night sky lit up by a huge blaze at a fuel depot after Israel began strikes against Iran’s oil and gas sector – raising the stakes for the global economy and the functioning of the Iranian state.
At least 14 people in Israel, including children, were killed in earlier strikes in the lead-up to Monday’s attacks, according to authorities.
The death toll in Iran had reached at least 224, with 90% of the casualties reported to be civilians, an Iranian health ministry spokesperson said.
G7 leaders began gathering in the Canadian Rockies on Sunday with the Israel-Iran conflict expected to be a top priority.
Before leaving for the summit on Sunday, US president Donald Trump was asked what he was doing to de-escalate the situation. “I hope there’s going to be a deal. I think it’s time for a deal,” he told reporters. “Sometimes they have to fight it out.”
German chancellor Friedrich Merz said his goals for the summit included for Iran to not develop or possess nuclear weapons, ensuring Israel’s right to defend itself, avoiding escalation of the conflict and creating room for diplomacy. “This issue will be very high on the agenda of the G7 summit,” Merz told reporters.
Iran has told mediators Qatar and Oman that it is not open to negotiating a ceasefire while it is under Israeli attack, an official briefed on the communications told Reuters on Sunday.
In Washington, two US officials told Reuters that Trump had vetoed an Israeli plan in recent days to kill Iran’s supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei.
When asked about the Reuters report, Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu told Fox News “There’s so many false reports of conversations that never happened, and I’m not going to get into that.“
“We do what we need to do,” he added.
Israel began the assault with a surprise attack on Friday that wiped out the top echelon of Iran’s military command and damaged its nuclear sites, and pledged the campaign would escalate in the coming days.
Iran vowed to “open the gates of hell” in retaliation.
Trump has lauded Israel’s offensive while denying Iranian allegations that the US has taken part and warning Tehran not to widen its retaliation to include US targets.
However, two US officials said on Friday that the US military had helped shoot down Iranian missiles that were headed toward Israel.
The US president has repeatedly said Iran could end the war by agreeing to tough restrictions on its nuclear programme, which Iran says is for peaceful purposes but which western countries and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) nuclear watchdog say could be used to make an atomic bomb.
With Reuters and the Associated Press
The British luxury carmaker Jaguar Land Rover has warned of a hit to profits from Donald Trump’s tariffs, after the company temporarily paused deliveries to the US.
The carmaker, which is owned by India’s Tata Motors, halted shipments to America in April and removed some marketing programmes after the US president imposed a 25% duty on all foreign-made vehicles, before resuming them last month. The country accounts for more than a quarter of JLR’s sales.
As part of a presentation to investors released to the Mumbai stock exchange, JLR, which makes the Defender sports utility vehicle (SUV), said it was “reallocating available units to accessible markets” to boost profits. It is also considering raising prices in the US to help to counter the impact of tariffs.
The company said it continued to engage with the US and UK governments regarding a limited trade deal signed between the two countries in May. The deal allows the UK to export 100,000 cars a year to the US at a 10% tariff, reducing it from the 27.5% levy imposed on all countries.
Britain’s ambassador to the US, Peter Mandelson, said shortly after the deal was agreed that it had immediately prevented job losses at JLR’s factory in the West Midlands. JLR’s chief executive, Adrian Mardell, said the deal would help to sustain 250,000 jobs.
“This deal has saved those jobs,” Mandelson told CNN at the time. “That’s a pretty big achievement in my view, and I’m very pleased that the president has signed it.”
Its fellow British luxury carmaker Bentley also halted sales to the US as it waited for lower tariffs from the UK’s trade deal, with no clarity on when the 10% rate will start.
While orders placed directly by customers are still shipped to the US, Bentley has stopped exports of vehicles that would sit at dealerships before being sold. All its cars are produced in Crewe, Cheshire.
JLR manufactures its Range Rover SUVs in the UK, but the Defender is made in Slovakia, a member of the EU, which has not yet agreed a trade pact with the Trump administration.
Reflecting the impact of tariffs and uncertainty in the global car industry, JLR lowered its forecast for margins on underlying profits, measured by earnings before interest and taxes, to between 5% and 7% this year, from 10% previously estimated. The company achieved a profit margin of 8.5% in the year to 31 March.
Shares in Tata Motors fell by more than 5% in early trading and later traded 3.8% lower.
Sign up to Business Today
Get set for the working day – we'll point you to all the business news and analysis you need every morning
after newsletter promotion
Analysts said JLR might be shielded to some extent from higher tariff costs as its cars were bought by wealthier customers who were unlikely to be put off by a bigger price tag. On the other hand, JLR does not have manufacturing in the US, unlike most of its rivals, such as Germany’s Mercedes-Benz and BMW.
Tata, a conglomerate that owns Air India, is also dealing with the fallout of last week’s plane crash near Ahmedabad, which killed at least 279 people. The group took control of the formerly state-owned airline in 2022 and merged it last year with Vistara, a joint venture with Singapore Airlines.
All but one of the passengers died after the plane crashed into buildings moments after failing to take off properly from Ahmedabad airport.
Air India’s chair, N Chandrasekaran, told staff on Monday that the crash should be a catalyst to building a safer airline. In a meeting attended by 700 staff at the airline’s headquarters near Delhi, he said the crash was the “most heartbreaking” crisis of his career.
Look into the western sky this week to see an eye-catching conjunction between Mars and Regulus, the brightest star in the constellation of Leo, the lion. The chart shows the view from London at 2300 BST on 16 June 2025.
The pair of celestial objects will be separated by less than a degree, less than twice the apparent diameter of the full moon. This means that as well as being an easy spot with the naked eye, they are close enough to fit into the same field of view when viewed through binoculars. Although they will move further apart as the week continues.
The colour difference between them will be striking. Mars will be red whereas Regulus shines with a blue-white colour. Regulus is the 21st brightest star in the night sky and lies about 79 light years away from us. It contains just over four times the mass of the sun, and has a diameter just over four times larger, too, giving out about 340 times the sun’s energy.
From the southern hemisphere, too, the conjunction appears in the north-north-west. In addition, on 19 June, the moon will be close to Saturn in the constellation Pisces, the fishes.
Good morning.
The man suspected of opening fire on two Minnesota legislators and their spouses on 14 June, killing one of them and her husband, was apprehended late on Sunday night and charged with two counts of murder and two of attempted murder, the state’s governor, Tim Walz, said.
Vance Boelter, 57, is suspected of fatally shooting the Democratic state representative Melissa Hortman and her husband, Mark, at their residence early on Saturday. Boelter is also suspected of shooting the state senator John Hoffman and his wife, Yvette, at their home, seriously injuring them.
“One man’s unthinkable actions have altered the state of Minnesota,” Walz told a news conference.
How did the suspect get into the legislator’s homes? Authorities allege Boelter impersonated a police officer, wearing a uniform that most civilians would not be able to distinguish from the real thing and driving a vehicle made to resemble a police SUV.
Where did the manhunt end? After firing shots at police and fleeing on foot, he was finally caught in a rural area in Sibley county, south-west of Minneapolis, according to police.
Iranian missiles have struck the Israeli cities of Tel Aviv and Haifa, destroying homes and fuelling concerns among world leaders at this week’s G7 meeting that the conflict between the two regional enemies could lead to a broader Middle East war.
Israel’s Magen David Adom (MDA) emergency service said on Monday that four people were pronounced dead after strikes at four sites in central Israel, with 87 injured. The dead were two women and two men, the MDA said.
  Iranian state TV said the country fired at least 100 missiles at Israel, signalling that it had no intention of yielding to international calls for de-escalation as it pressed on with its retaliation for Israel’s surprise attack on Tehran’s nuclear program and military leadership on Friday.
Why did Israel say it launched the attack on Iran? Israel’s prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, said he had acted to pre-empt a secret Iranian programme to build a nuclear bomb, claiming Tehran already had the capacity to build nine.
At least eight Palestinians were killed and dozens more wounded yesterday in gunfire near food distribution points in Gaza.
Although Israel has said Gaza is a secondary theatre of operations to its new war with Iran, Palestinians reported continuing serious violence including fire around US- and Israel-supported aid distributions points, amid fears that global attention is moving away from Gaza.
There have been near-daily shootings near the sites since they opened last month. Witnesses say Israeli forces have fired repeatedly on the crowds and health officials say scores of people have been killed.
What has Israel said? The military said it has fired warning shots at what it says were suspects approaching its forces.
The G7 summit in the Canadian Rockies is starting today amid tensions about trade with the US and concerns about the conflict in the Middle East. Donald Trump, and the leaders of Japan, France, the United Kingdom, Italy, Germany and Canada are in for a busy time.
Emmanuel Macron has criticised  Trump’s threats to take over Greenland as he became the first foreign head of state to visit the vast, mineral-rich Arctic territory since the US president began making explicit threats to annex it.
Fashion influenced by Islam and other religions is expected to become “mainstream” globally, in spite of politicians singling out the burqa and the hijab, as the rise of “modest fashion” is powered by influencers, luxury brands and big tech.
A demonstrator who was shot on Saturday during Salt Lake City’s “No Kings” protest has died, Utah police said yesterday. Arthur Folasa Ah Loo, 39, was reportedly shot by a man on the event’s peacekeeping team.
It is an unwelcome question, but an important one: did the National Gallery in London buy a £2.5m dud? This has remained the suspicion of many experts since one of Britain’s premier cultural institutions acquired Samson and Delilah, a long-lost masterpiece by the Flemish artist Peter Paul Rubens, in 1980. Forty-five years on, the debate has been stirred once again, with a petition launched calling for the National Gallery to honour its 1997 promise to stage a public debate on its authenticity.
Prof Marci Shore, a scholar of European history, made news around the world when she moved to Canada with her academic husband, Timothy Snyder, and the academic Jason Stanley. She talks to Jonathan Freedland about Trump, teaching history and how terror atomises society, in a conversation in which she also invokes the ultimate warning from history: “The lesson of 1933 is: you get out sooner rather than later.”
Since the mass adoption of smartphones, most people have been walking around with a device that can neutralise boredom in an instant. We often reach for our phones for something to do during moments of quiet or solitude, or to distract us – but what happens to all those difficult or untamed half-thoughts that start to form in the milliseconds before we dig into our pockets and pull out our phones again?
First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, subscribe now.
If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com
There are two ways of looking at events in the Middle East over the past year and a half. One is that the response to 7 October 2023 was a break from the past. The attack by Hamas triggered an Israeli response so vengeful that it has been impossible to fit within the boundaries set by international laws or contain geographically – the genocide in Gaza, the invasion of southern Lebanon, the occupation of the buffer zone in southwestern Syria and airstrikes across that country, and now its attacks against Iran.
Then there is the explanation that these events are part of a historical continuum. Regional peace was the result of a volatile status quo that was always vulnerable to disruption. It only looked tenable because it relied on a variety of factors that, working together, looked like a settlement. This fine balance has been tipped by an Israeli government that is now fixated on pursuing its own agenda, singlehandedly rewriting the future of the region in ways that it is unable to explain and unwilling to control.
One of the elements of this brittle peace was the presence of the Gulf powers as mediators. Gulf rapprochement with Iran was not motivated by trade or fellow feeling, but rather the pragmatic need for stability. Some Gulf states also crossed a historic red line and either recognised Israel with the signing of the Abraham accords or began a process of normalisation. Now these countries find themselves caught between two feuding sides and at risk of alienating Israel’s main ally, the US, with whom it has close military and economic ties.
The status quo also relied on suppressing Palestinian rights to a degree that everyone was happy with; everyone except the Palestinians, of course. In a sense, the Palestinian problem had also been neutralised. When the assault on Gaza began, it exposed Israel’s views and intentions to the world, raising the spectre of a new Nakba. It also brought Iran and its proxies, Hezbollah and the Houthis of Yemen, into play as defenders of Palestinian rights. Once Iran entered the frame, and Israel felt empowered to act without break or censure, there was no going back.
Something else has snapped – justification for Israel’s actions has been stretched beyond plausibility. With the safety of Jewish people as the rationale for unbridled support, and Israel’s importance as a close partner in a strategic region, the US and other allies have provided carte blanche for the country to defend itself. But this relies on Israel responding to any threats in a proportional way, so as not to create further instability. Israel has not only responded inappropriately to threats, it has weaponised them to such an extent that it has become a primary factor in its own insecurity, and that of the rest of the region.
Backing from allies also relies on transparency between the camps. The colossal military, economic and political cover is provided on the understanding that whoever is in charge of the Israeli government has no other motives for engaging in conflict other than securing safety for its citizens. Trust has been broken by the current prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, who is using the war to bolster public support for his own political career. He is not only making Israelis less safe, but further capitalising on that insecurity as he plays the role of protector.
Relations with key allies were being put to the test over Gaza as public pressure from within western countries grew, fed by constant images of starving children, charred hospitals and row after row of body bags. By opening a new front and engaging another enemy, the Israeli government has a chance at both restoring the terms of its pact with its sponsors, and the historical narrative that it is the victim, acting in irreproachable good faith. Here it is, once again in need of support, suffering strikes and civilian casualties at the hands of a belligerent neighbour.
Stories of people dying of starvation in Gaza or of the hungry being killed while queueing for food, have fallen away from the headlines. The relentless assault on the West Bank and the expansion of illegal settlements has receded from view. The pressure that was beginning to build on Israel to let in more aid and honour a ceasefire has been replaced with the same mealy-mouthed defences that we saw in the early days of the war in Gaza, plus the same pabulum of urging “restraint”. The clock is reset.
Regarding the strikes on Iran, Israel appears to have drawn upon the lessons of the Iraq war, claiming it has acted in defence on the basis of intelligence that the world has to take on trust. How imminent was the threat? Who has the right to decide when a “pre-emptive strike” is justified? And who has the right to respond to an illegal unilateral attack? What we do know so far is that global politics is run on the basis of exceptions and different benchmarks of sovereignty. Yes, Iran has violated its nuclear non-proliferation obligations, but Israel refused to sign up to them altogether.
These distinctions in the past could be more easily smoothed over, because Israel and the US were “the good guys”, and Iran was part of an “axis of evil”. But the erosion of Israel’s and the US’s credibility as honest interlocutors, wise in their security considerations and compliant with international law, has made these campaigns less straightforward.
Here is the real war that Israel is fighting. Iran still retains a measure of political will and military capability that is too high for comfort for Israel. And so as the window of Israeli credibility closes, it becomes more necessary for it to diminish Iran’s political credibility and military capabilities. But what is the endgame? Does Israel envisage a close-ended campaign, after which it retreats, satisfied with the results? Or is that not a plausible scenario, considering the counterstrikes it has provoked. It’s all looking very Gaza-like: escalation with no end; or regime change with no plan.
Both Israel’s campaigns – the propaganda one and the one on the ground – share one thing: they regard the Middle East as a theatre for domestic politics, reputation management and experimentation in bringing about “safety” on yet-to-be-defined terms. But the region is not just Israel’s back yard. It is other people’s homes and they have their own politics, histories, populations and security needs that, increasingly, are subject to a country that has decided that only its own agenda matters.
Nesrine Malik is a Guardian columnist.
She finds the whole idea absurd. To Prof Marci Shore, the notion that the Guardian, or anyone else, should want to interview her about the future of the US is ridiculous. She’s an academic specialising in the history and culture of eastern Europe and describes herself as a “Slavicist”, yet here she is, suddenly besieged by international journalists keen to ask about the country in which she insists she has no expertise: her own. “It’s kind of baffling,” she says.
In fact, the explanation is simple enough. Last month, Shore, together with her husband and fellow scholar of European history, Timothy Snyder, and the academic Jason Stanley, made news around the world when they announced that they were moving from Yale University in the US to the University of Toronto in Canada. It was not the move itself so much as their motive that garnered attention. As the headline of a short video op-ed the trio made for the New York Times put it, “We Study Fascism, and We’re Leaving the US”.
Starkly, Shore invoked the ultimate warning from history. “The lesson of 1933 is: you get out sooner rather than later.” She seemed to be saying that what had happened then, in Germany, could happen now, in Donald Trump’s America – and that anyone tempted to accuse her of hyperbole or alarmism was making a mistake. “My colleagues and friends, they were walking around and saying, ‘We have checks and balances. So let’s inhale, checks and balances, exhale, checks and balances.’ I thought, my God, we’re like people on the Titanic saying, ‘Our ship can’t sink. We’ve got the best ship. We’ve got the strongest ship. We’ve got the biggest ship.’ And what you know as a historian is that there is no such thing as a ship that can’t sink.”
Since Shore, Snyder and Stanley announced their plans, the empirical evidence has rather moved in their favour. Whether it was the sight of tanks transported into Washington DC ahead of the military parade that marked Trump’s birthday last Saturday or the deployment of the national guard to crush protests in Los Angeles, alongside marines readied for the same task, recent days have brought the kind of developments that could serve as a dramatist’s shorthand for the slide towards fascism.
“It’s all almost too stereotypical,” Shore reflects. “A 1930s-style military parade as a performative assertion of the Führerprinzip,” she says, referring to the doctrine established by Adolf Hitler, locating all power in the dictator. “As for Los Angeles, my historian’s intuition is that sending in the national guard is a provocation that will be used to foment violence and justify martial law. The Russian word of the day here could be provokatsiia.”
That response captures the double lens through which Shore sees the Trump phenomenon, informed by both the Third Reich and the “neo-totalitarianism” exhibited most clearly in the Russia of Vladimir Putin. We speak as Shore is trying to do her day job, having touched down in Warsaw en route to Kyiv, with Poland and Ukraine long a focus of her studies. Via Zoom from a hotel lobby, she peppers our conversation with terms drawn from a Russian political lexicon that suddenly fits a US president.
“The unabashed narcissism, this Nero-like level of narcissism and this lack of apology … in Russian, it’s obnazhenie; ‘laying bare’.” It’s an approach to politics “in which all of the ugliness is right on the surface,” not concealed in any way. “And that’s its own kind of strategy. You just lay everything out there.”
She fears that the sheer shamelessness of Trump has “really disempowered the opposition, because our impulse is to keep looking for the thing that’s hidden and expose it, and we think that’s going to be what makes the system unravel.” But the problem is not what’s hidden, it’s “what we’ve normalised – because the whole strategy is to throw it all in your face.”
None of this has been an overnight realisation for Shore. It had been building for years, with origins that predate Trump. Now 53, she had spent most of her 20s focused on eastern Europe, barely paying attention to US politics, when the deadlocked presidential election of 2000 and the aborted Florida recount fiasco made her realise that “we didn’t really know how to count votes”. Next she was wondering: “Why exactly were we going to war in Iraq?” But the moment her academic work began to shed an uncomfortable light on the American present came in the presidential race of 2008.
“When John McCain chose Sarah Palin, I felt like she was a character right out of the 1930s.” The Republican vice-presidential candidate lived, Shore thought, “in a totally fictitious world … not constrained by empirical reality.” Someone like that, Shore believed, could really rile up a mob.
And then came Trump.
Once again, it was the lack of truthfulness that terrified her. “Without a distinction between truth and lies, there is no grounding for a distinction between good and evil,” she says. Lying is essential to totalitarianism; she understood that from her scholarly research. But while Hitler and Stalin’s lies were in the service of some vast “eschatological vision”, the post-truth dishonesty of a Trump or Putin struck her as different. The only relevant criterion for each man is whether this or that act is “advantageous or disadvantageous to him at any given moment. It’s pure, naked transaction.”
When Trump was elected in 2016, Shore found herself “lying on the floor of my office, throwing up into a plastic bag. I felt like this was the end of the world. I felt like something had happened that was just catastrophic on a world historical scale, that was never going to be OK.”
Did she consider leaving the US then? She did, not least because both she and her husband had received offers to teach in Geneva. “We tore our hair out debating it.” Snyder’s instinct was to stay and fight: he’s a “committed patriot”, she says. Besides, their children were younger; there was their schooling to think about. So they stayed at Yale. “These things are so contingent; you can’t do a control study on real life.”
But when Trump won again last November, there was no doubt in her mind. However bad things had looked in 2016, now was worse. “So much had been dismantled … the guardrails, or the checks and balances, had systematically been taken down. The supreme court’s ruling on immunity; the failure to hold Trump accountable for anything, including the fact that he incited, you know, a violent insurrection on the Capitol, that he encouraged a mob that threatened to hang his vice-president, that he called up the Georgia secretary of state and asked him to find votes. I felt like we were in much more dangerous territory.”
Events so far have vindicated those fears. The deportations; students disappeared off the streets, one famously caught on video as she was bundled into an unmarked car by masked immigration agents; the humiliation of Volodymyr Zelenskyy, as Trump and JD Vance ordered the Ukrainian president to express his gratitude to them, even as they were “abusing” him, an episode, says Shore, “right out of Stalinism” – to say nothing of Trump’s regular attacks on “USA-hating judges” who rule against the executive branch. It adds up to a playbook that is all too familiar. “Dark fantasies are coming true.”
She readily admits that her reaction to these events is not wholly or coldly analytical. It’s more personal than that. “I’m a neurotic catastrophist,” she says. “I feel like we could just subtitle [this period] ‘the vindication of the neurotic catastrophist’. I mean, I’ve been anxious and neurotic since birth.” She draws the contrast with her husband: “Tim is not an anxious person by nature, and that is just hardwired.”
She’s referring in part to their different backgrounds. Snyder is a child of Quakers; Shore is Jewish, raised in Allentown, eastern Pennsylvania. Her father was a doctor and her mother “a doctor’s wife” who was later a preschool teacher. Shore grew up in a community with Holocaust survivors. “I do think there’s something about having heard stories of the Holocaust at a young age that was formative. If you hear these stories – people narrating what they went through in Auschwitz, even if they’re narrating it for eight, nine or 10-year-olds – it impresses itself on your consciousness. Once you know it’s possible, you just can’t unknow that.”
How bad does she think it could get? Matter-of-factly, she says: “My fear is we’re headed to civil war.” She restates a basic truth about the US. “There’s a lot of guns. There’s a lot of gun violence. There’s a habituation to violence that’s very American, that Europeans don’t understand.” Her worry is that the guns are accompanied by a new “permissiveness” that comes from the top, that was typified by Trump’s indulgence of the January 6 rioters, even those who wanted to murder his vice-president. As she puts it: “You can feel that brewing.”
She also worries that instead of fighting back, “people become atomised. The arbitrariness of terror atomises people. You know, people put their heads down, they go quiet, they get in line, if only for the very reasonable, rational reason that any individual acting rationally has a reason to think that the personal cost of refusing to make a compromise is going to be greater than the social benefit of their one act of resistance. So you get a classic collective action problem.”
Later she speaks of the beauty of solidarity, those fleeting moments when societies come together, often to expel a tyrant. She recalls the trade union Solidarity in communist-era Poland and the Maidan revolution in Ukraine. By leaving America – and Americans – in their hour of need, is she not betraying the very solidarity she reveres?
“I feel incredibly guilty about that,” she sighs. All the more so when she sees the criticism directed at her husband. They were on sabbatical together in Canada when Trump won the 2024 election, but “had he been alone, he would have gone back to fight … That’s his personality. But he wouldn’t have done that to me and the kids.” To those minded to hurl accusations of betrayal and cowardice, she says: “Direct them all to me. I’m the coward. I take full blame for that.” It was she, not Snyder, who decided that “no, I’m not bringing my kids back to this”.
I linger on that word “coward”. It goes to one of the fears that led to Shore’s decision. She does not doubt her own intellectual courage, her willingness to say or write what she believes, regardless of the consequences. But, she says, “I’ve never trusted myself to be physically courageous.” She worries that she is, in fact, “a physical coward”.
She began to wonder: what would I do if someone came to take my students away? “If you’re in a classroom, you know your job is to look out for your students.” But could she do it? Many of her students are from overseas. “What am I going to do if masked guys in balaclavas come and try to take this person away? Would I be brave? Would I try to pull them away? Would I try to pull the mask off? Would I scream? Would I cry? Would I run away?” She didn’t trust herself to do what would need to be done.
So now she is in what she calls “a luxurious position”: at a university across the border, safely out of reach of both Trump’s threats to cut funding and the ICE officials currently striking terror into the hearts of international students and others. As a result, she feels “more obligated to speak out … on behalf of my colleagues and on behalf of other Americans who are at risk”.
At one point in our conversation, we talk about those US citizens who put Trump back in the White House, even though, as she puts it, they knew who he was. “Nothing was hidden. People had plenty of time to think about it, and they chose this. And that disgust, I couldn’t shake that. I thought: ‘People wanted this – and I don’t want to have anything to do with this.’”
Does that mean she will never return to the US? “I would never say, ‘I would never go back.’ I always feel that what history teaches you is not what will happen, but what can happen. The possibilities are generally much more capacious than anyone is expecting at that moment.”
Contained in that remark is, if not optimism, then at least the possibility of it. And, right now, that might be as much as we can ask for.
Israel and Iran have broadened their strikes against each other on the third day of an escalating war that has killed and injured hundreds of people, as Donald Trump called for an end to the conflict and warned Tehran against striking US targets in the region.
G7 leaders flying to Canada for a summit that starts on Monday are likely to try to use their time with the US president to urge him to keep the US out of the conflict and use his influence with Israel to broker a ceasefire.
Trump claimed he was working behind the scenes on a deal. “We will have PEACE, soon, between Israel and Iran!” he said in a post on his Truth Social platform. “Many calls and meetings now taking place. I do a lot, and never get credit for anything, but that’s OK, the PEOPLE understand.”
His envoys face a challenge that appears to be deepening by the day, however, with Israel and Iran widening their attacks, and the casualty tolls rising.
Israel attacked Iran’s energy industry and defence ministry on Saturday night, leaving a fuel depot ablaze through the night outside Tehran. It followed with evacuation warnings to civilians living near arms factories and on Sunday launched a rare daytime raid on the capital.
Iran fired at least 70 missiles towards Israel and several evaded air defences. They hit a refinery in the north, killed four people in a Palestinian-majority town near the Sea of Galilee and brought down part of a high-rise apartment block in Bat Yam, south of Tel Aviv.
It was the heaviest missile barrage the country has faced, and the damage was shocking to many Israelis. Despite enduring years of rockets from Gaza and Lebanon, and months of missiles fired from Yemen by the Houthis, none of those groups could deploy the scale or destructive power of the Iranian attacks.
At least 14 people were killed, three were missing and hundreds injured by Sunday morning. Benjamin Netanyahu visited the site of the Bat Yam strike on Sunday to see the damage and meet rescue workers. “Iran will pay a very heavy price for the premeditated murder of civilians, women and children,” the prime minister said.
In Iran the toll is many times higher, with at least 224 fatalities since Israel began its attacks, according to Iran’s health ministry. Spokesperson Hossein Kermanpour said on social media that 1,277 people had also been hospitalised, claiming that more than 90% of the casualties were civilians.
A finance analyst in Tehran said: “This is a massacre. The blasts haven’t stopped. Children are crying and we fear many civilians have been killed. There’s a smell of death in the air. I can’t stop crying.”
An Israeli strike on Sunday killed the intelligence chief of Iran’s Revolutionary Guards, Mohammad Kazemi, along with two other officers, the IRNA state media news agency reported.
“Three intelligence generals, Mohammad Kazemi, Hassan Mohaghegh and Mohsen Bagheri, were assassinated and fell as martyrs,” the agency said, citing a Revolutionary Guards statement.
Late on Sunday the Israeli military said that it was striking surface-to-surface missile sites in Iran, its latest move in three days of escalating conflict.
IDF spokesperson Nadav Shoshani wrote on X: “We are operating against this threat in our skies and in Iranian skies.”
As fuel depots outside Tehran blazed on Saturday, Trump presided over the US’s biggest military parade in decades. He later said the arsenal on display could be deployed against Iran if it targeted American assets.
The US president said in a social media post: “If we are attacked in any way shape or form by Iran, the full strength and might of the U.S. Armed Forces will come down on you at levels never seen before.”
There is little question that Israel would like the US to join its campaign. Only American weapons have the capability to reach parts of the Iranian nuclear project such as the Fordow uranium enrichment plant, which is buried deep under a mountain.
But while Iran has called off talks with the US on the future of its nuclear programme, and accused Washington of being Israel’s “partner” in the offensive launched on Friday, it has held off attacking US bases, embassies or other targets.
With most of its top military leaders assassinated, Israel claiming domination of Iranian airspace from western Iran to Tehran, and several key nuclear sites seriously damaged, the regime in Tehran faces an unprecedented threat to its stability and possibly even its survival.
Netanyahu has made no secret of his desire for regime change and on Sunday told Fox News that it “could certainly be the result” of the Israeli campaign.
Trump has been more wary, and his administration vetoed a recent Israeli plan to kill the country’s supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei. Israel briefed the White House on the “credible” plan for assassination, but it was rejected by Americans as a dangerous escalation.
The US president reiterated on Sunday as he departed for the G7 summit that he hoped for a deal between Iran and Israel, but added that “sometimes you have to fight it out”. He refused to say if he had asked Israel to pause its strikes.
Iran’s foreign minister, Abbas Araghchi, signalled on Sunday that Iran was open to attempts to de-escalate. If Israeli strikes on Iran stopped, “our responses will also stop”, he said, perhaps in an appeal to Trump’s promotion of himself as the ultimate dealmaker, and his election pitch that he would end America’s decades of overseas wars.
The US is already trying to promote an exchange of messages with Iran to “calm tensions” with Israel, although the effort falls short of formal mediation, the Haaretz newspaper reported quoting foreign sources.
Trump has spoken about the war with Iran’s ally Vladimir Putin and the emir of Qatar, Tamim bin Hamad al-Thani, who has been in direct contact with the Iranian president, Masoud Pezeshkian, since Friday.
Friedrich Merz, the German chancellor, called the leader of Oman, Sultan Haitham bin Tariq al-Said, who had been due to host US-Iran talks, a government spokesperson said. They discussed the importance of halting the conflict and stopping Iran getting nuclear weapons.
For Israel, Saturday night was the bloodiest of the conflict, despite its success in knocking out much of Iran’s military hierarchy and parts of its missile systems over the previous day.
An Israeli military official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said that even advanced air defences could not stop every missile when Iran launched large barrages, as it did on Saturday night.
“In these amounts, of hundreds of projectiles, sadly there will be hits,” the official said. “Even the greatest aerial defence system doesn’t get to 100%.”
Iran deployed about 70 missiles overnight, and dozens of drones, although Israel has a higher success rate intercepting those slower-moving projectiles. Over two nights, Iran fired about 270 missiles at Israel and 22 of them evaded air defences.
One of those appeared to target a refinery in the northern city of Haifa. In a statement to the Tel Aviv stock exchange, Bazan Group said there were no injuries at its plant but pipelines and transmission lines were damaged, forcing some facilities to shut down.
Netanyahu said he ordered the pre-emptive operation because Iranian progress towards developing nuclear weapons posed a critical security threat.
After taking out the top of the military hierarchy and vital nuclear scientists, as well as striking key parts of the nuclear programme, Israel appears to be widening its campaign.
It hit energy facilities overnight including an oil depot near Tehran that blazed through the night and a refinery in Bushehr province on the Gulf, and has told people living near arms factories in Iran to evacuate their homes.
An Israeli military official said in the coming days there would be more attacks on “dual use” facilities and strikes to prevent Iran expanding its stockpile of missiles, estimated to stand at about 2,000 before Friday.
Additional reporting by Deepa Parent
The decline in gull numbers must be a cause for concern. However, having once lived in a much gull-colonised town, I’d like to advance an alternative view to Sophie Pavelle’s (Trying to get rid of noisy, food-stealing gulls is missing the point – it’s humans who are the pests, 8 June).
Urban gulls excrete guano copiously. It covers cars, buildings and streets in a steady, noxious rain. As a corrosive substance it damages paintwork on buildings and paint on cars, guttering and ironwork, such as railings. As a fertiliser it boosts the growth of weeds on roofs and pavements, blocking drainage systems.
Consequently, an enormous, expensive amount of repainting, woodwork replacement, guttering replacement, roofing repairs, pavement cleaning, car washing and car respraying must occur – all of these, in their way, ultimately creating substantial damage to the environment (paint, cleaning agents, building materials) at a high cost to local authorities.
Some towns, such as Exmouth, avoid this by mounting campaigns to prevent gull-feeding. What also needs to occur is the restoration of habitats where gulls once lived – not a defence of their invasive and polluting presence in towns. Their webbed feet prove they are not naturally urban dwellers, after all.Richard EllisDerby
 Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication in our letters section.
Israel’s surprise attack on targets across Iran on Friday, has been followed by three days of escalating strikes, as both sides threatened more devastation in the biggest ever confrontation between the longstanding enemies.
Here’s a round-up of the conflict so far:
Israel hit more than 100 major targets in Iran on Friday, including nuclear facilities and missile sites, and killed senior military commanders and scientists. Satellite imagery showed significant damage to areas of the Natanz nuclear site, Iran’s most significant nuclear enrichment facility, but the fuel enrichment plant appeared to be undamaged. A nuclear research centre in Isfahan was also hit.
Among those killed were senior military figures – including the chief of staff of Iran’s armed forces, Maj Gen Mohammad Bagheri, and the commander of the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC), Gen Hossein Salami – as well as at least six Iranian nuclear scientists.
Israeli strikes continued over the weekend and into Monday, as the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) targeted air defences around the Tehran and claimed they had gained control of the skies over the capital. Israel’s military said it had hit “more than 80” targets in Tehran since Saturday, including the defence ministry headquarters and missile launchers used to strike Israel and defend Iran. The Iranian oil ministry said Israel had targeted two fuel depots in the Tehran area. Iran has accused Israel of hitting civilian areas in Tehran with the health ministry reporting that Israeli strikes had killed 224 people since Friday.
Iran has launched several waves of missiles at Israel since Friday, with Israeli authorities saying at least 14 people had been killed since Friday and 390 injured. Rescuers and medics said a strike late on Saturday destroyed a three-storey building in the town of Tamra, killing four women, and six people were killed and at least 180 injured at the site of a missile strike in Bat Yam, near Tel Aviv. Those number were set to rise on Monday after Iranian missiles struck Tel Aviv and Haifa, with fires were seen burning at a power plant in the northern city.
Iran warned the US, UK and France that their military bases and ships would be targeted if they helped block the Iranian missile and drone retaliation for Israel’s attack. US officials told some media that American air defence systems and a Navy destroyer helped Israel shoot down some incoming ballistic missiles on Friday. The UK was moving jets and other military assets to the Middle East, as UK prime minister Keir Starmer refused to rule out defending Israel.
In justifying the attack, Israel’s prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, said he had acted to pre-empt a secret Iranian programme to build a nuclear bomb, claiming Tehran already had the capacity to build nine nuclear bombs. The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) board ruled on Thursday that Iran had violated its obligations under the nuclear non-proliferation treaty in failing to cooperate fully with IAEA inspections and for amassing an estimated 400kg of highly enriched uranium. Western intelligence assessments until now have generally said Iran has not taken the final decision to build a bomb.
Iran’s supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, threatened “severe punishment” and claimed residential areas had been targeted. The latest round of US-Iran nuclear talks scheduled for Sunday were cancelled and Tehran reportedly told prospective mediators Qatar and Oman that it was not open to negotiating a ceasefire while it is under Israeli attack.
The US secretary of state, Marco Rubio, said early on Friday that the US had not taken part in the Israeli attack, which he described as “unilateral”, but by later in the day, president Donald Trump told reporters that the US had been aware of the impending attack. At the G7 conference in Canada on Sunday, Trump claimed he was working behind the scenes on a deal, while elsewhere Reuters reported that the president had vetoed an Israeli plan in recent days to kill Iran’s supreme leader.
Donald Trump’s “America First” policies are undermining decades of transatlantic cooperation just as Putin’s Russia destabilises Europe with direct military aggression. But these twin shocks have unintentionally accomplished something the EU institutions never could. They have made European integration feel not just important, but existential – a matter of democratic survival – for ordinary citizens.
From Helsinki to Lisbon, people are suddenly experiencing the same existential unease. Trade wars, defence threats and military aggression don’t respect borders. More and more Europeans now recognise that their small, individual nations cannot withstand simultaneous pressure from both Washington and Moscow. They find themselves caught between economic coercion and military intimidation.
Recent Eurobarometer data confirm the shift: 74% of Europeans now view EU membership as a positive thing – the highest level of support ever recorded.
This is a historic opportunity. And yet, EU and national leaders remain paralysed – unable, or unwilling, to convert this public support and shared urgency into political momentum for reducing Europe’s dependence on US military guarantees and economic shelter.
This is the real tragedy: Europe’s governments no longer practise the very ideals they preach. Though the EU still speaks the language of multilateralism and climate leadership, its policy direction and that of most of its member states increasingly mirror Trump’s.
On migration, the EU’s new pact on migration and asylum reframes asylum as a security risk, echoing Trump’s immigration crackdown. On climate, Ursula von der Leyen’s European Commission has quietly dismantled key green deal initiatives and delayed critical legislation, in a deregulatory shift reminiscent of Trump’s EPA rollbacks. Civil society is also under mounting pressure. Just as Trump has targeted non-profits and dissenters, the conservative European People’s party (EPP) – von der Leyen’s political “family” – has launched an unprecedented assault on NGOs, threatening their funding and legitimacy. Even fundamental rights are at risk. The EU’s response to Hungary’s ban on Pride marches and expansion of surveillance powers has been tepid at best – tacitly tolerating democratic backsliding within its own ranks.
But perhaps the most dangerous convergence lies in how power is exercised. Trump governs by executive fiat, sidelining Congress with executive orders. Today’s commission is drifting in a similar direction at the demand of a majority of its member states. It centralises power, pushing through complex “omnibus” packages and bypassing the European parliament most recently in its proposal to rearm the EU.
What we are witnessing is not just a rupture in the transatlantic alliance but something more insidious.
There are signs of an ideological convergence between Trump’s America and today’s European political centre, where parties are increasingly stealing ideas from the far-right – as in Germany – or governing with those parties, directly or indirectly. That is not only the reality in many EU countries but in the EU system itself under von der Leyen.
Despite pledges in her first term to stick to the centre of politics, the commission increasingly relies on the votes of a rightwing majority in the European parliament, formed by conservative and far-right groupings of all stripes. These include the European Conservatives and Reformists (ECR), which used to be considered mainstream conservative but which now brings together Italian prime minister Giorgia Meloni’s Brothers of Italy party with more extreme far-right parties such as France’s Reconquête and the Sweden Democrats. There is also the Patriots for Europe (PfE) group, co-led by Marine Le Pen and Viktor Orbán, and the even more extreme Europe of Sovereign Nations (ESN), dominated by Germany’s Alternative für Deutschland.
The EPP has traditionally allied with socialist and liberal MEPs who as a bloc helped elect von der Leyen last year. But the EPP has recently voted with parties to the right of it, notably to delay a new deforestation law. The same happened on budgetary matters, the recognition of Edmundo González as Venezuela’s president, and more recently in blocking an EU ethics body.
There is also a growing presidentialisation of the commission. During the Covid pandemic, von der Leyen personally negotiated vaccine deals by text message – shielding those discussions from public and parliamentary scrutiny.
The risk is that tolerance of such a shift towards personalised, opaque governance makes it easier to pass to the “Trumpification” stage – where politicians increasingly borrow from the authoritarian playbook, preferring executive fiat over parliamentary democracy.
Sign up to This is Europe
The most pressing stories and debates for Europeans – from identity to economics to the environment
after newsletter promotion
This creeping phenomenon weakens Europe’s ability to respond to the very threats that should be pushing it closer together. Just when European citizens are most willing to support joint action – on Ukraine, Gaza, big tech, or defence – their leaders are failing to respond. What’s missing is the political courage to articulate a compelling alternative to far-right messaging – one that makes an affirmative case for EU-wide action on the issues that matter most to Europeans: common security, managed migration and shared prosperity. This means presenting European integration not as a threat to national identity, but as the means to protect and strengthen it.
When European nations pool their defence capabilities, they don’t surrender sovereignty – they multiply their capacity to defend their communities. When they coordinate migration policies, they don’t open floodgates – they create orderly, humane systems that serve both newcomers and existing communities. When they harmonise economic policies, they don’t level down – they lift up regions and workers who have been left behind. This vision appeals to the same desire for security and belonging that populists exploit, but offers real solutions instead of scapegoats.
This failure to articulate such a vision has real costs. Every month of delay in building European defence capabilities is another month of dependence on an unreliable US. Every compromise with authoritarians – whether in Budapest or Jerusalem – erodes the democratic credibility that makes European leadership possible.
Trump and Putin have inadvertently given Europe a shared sense of purpose and a need for urgent action. The question is not whether Europeans are ready to respond – the polls show they are. The question is whether Europe’s leaders will sleepwalk into irrelevance, or worse.
Alberto Alemanno is the Jean Monnet professor of EU law at HEC Paris and the founder of The Good Lobby
When an Iranian missile bound for the industrial port of Haifa dropped out of the sky on the town of Tamra on Saturday night, it fell on Israel’s most vulnerable, and in one devastating flash, lit up the country’s deepest divide.
The missile demolished a three-storey stone house and killed four members of the same family: Manar Khatib, and her two daughters – Shada, a university student, and Hala, a 13-year-old schoolgirl – as well as Manar’s sister-in-law, Manal.
It was a solid house built in an old Arab style and it had two “safe rooms’”, one on each floor. When they heard the air raid sirens Manar and her daughters ran to the one on the second floor as they had practised, but the reinforced concrete did not protect them. They were blown apart and the floor under them fell on the safe room directly below, crushing Manal.
The blast blew the core out of the building, and sent the neighbours flying. About 40 people were injured, though none of the wounds were life-threatening.
“The explosion was so loud I can still hear it,” said Azmeh Kiwan, a 50-year-old homeowner who lived directly opposite.
When he opened his eyes, the whole district was in total darkness. It was only when the town’s rescue workers came with their bright lights that the neighbours could see the road was full of rubble, and it was only when the sun rose that they saw body parts scattered on their terraces and roofs.
Kheir Abu-Elhija, a local first responder, who was one of the first on the scene, said he had worked 20 years as a nurse and never seen anything like it.
“The second floor safe room came right down on the first floor safe room and crushed everything,” he said. “The only way we could find Manal’s remains was by a trail of blood,” he said.
The war between Israel and Iran involves powerful modern weapons that can turn a human body into vapour and scraps in an instant. Israel also has modern air defences which have managed thus far to intercept most of the incoming Iranian missiles. And for three-quarters of the country there are underground bunkers, a virtual guarantee of survival.
But the Khatib family did not have a bunker. They were Palestinian citizens of Israel, like the rest of the 37,000 population of this old hillside town in the Lower Galilee. And in common with most Palestinian-majority towns, Tamra does not have a single underground shelter. Like much else in Israel, there is nothing equal about the way death comes from the sky.
“The Israeli government, since the creation of the state, didn’t invest in one public shelter for the Arab part of society,” Tamra’s mayor, Mussa Abu Rumi, said. The reinforced “safe rooms” in new-build houses are an inferior alternative, as the fate of the Khatibs showed, and Abu Rumi said only 40% of Tamra residents even have those.
“I would like to think that the government, since missiles have become part of warfare, will start a multi-dimensional programme to invest in the Arab community, and building shelters would be part of that,” the mayor said.
Asked if he thought the current hard-right coalition would pursue such a programme, he shook his head and admitted there was “no hope”.
While missile strike sites in Tel Aviv, Rishon ReZion and Bat Yam have been flooded with rescue workers, home front troops, police and volunteers, most of the clear-up in Tamra was done by neighbours and a handful of municipal workers.
Taking a water break on a shaded terrace, Azmeh Kiwan and his elder brother Bassam, who live directly across from the Khatib house, made clear in an interview they identified themselves as Israeli Arabs. Tamra is an ancient Arab village, they pointed out.
“I am from here. I belong to this place and I will die here,” Azmeh said. The brothers also declared themselves fully behind the war against Iran, a country they described as a wellhead of terrorism.
It was only afterwards, when the tape recorder was off, that another neighbour came forward to vent his anger, which he claimed was shared by all of Tamra, at a video that had circulated since last night.
It was filmed from a nearby Jewish town, and showed missiles and Israeli interceptors streaking across the black sky, but when a missile falls short and slams into Tamra, you can hear people around the camera rejoicing.
“To the village! To the village!” one man cries, and then several women’s voices join in, someone starts clapping and together they sing a verse that has become a Jewish extremist anthem. It consists of one line: “May your village burn” sung over and over again.
“Please write about this,” the neighbour said. “If I say anything I will have 20 police cars at my house.”
Abu Rumi said he knows where the video was made, and has informed the Israeli government and the police, but has little expectation of anyone being brought to justice.
“We are trying to engage with Israeli society all the time,” the mayor said. “What we find is hatred, and people who don’t see you as a legitimate human being in this place.”
He said the centre in Israeli politics had collapsed, and with it the few protections Palestinian citizens of Israel could count on.
“The political power that the settler parties have in government is creating this division,” he said. “They just see you as an Arab no matter where you are from.”
Ayman Odeh, a member of the Knesset who is a personal friend of the Khatib family, said: “There is a connection between the politics of this government and those who are celebrating this terrible situation.”
Odeh argued that war with Iran is just the latest symptom of an untreated wound at the heart of the Middle East.
“It is all connected to the Palestinian issue, and as long as we do not resolve the Palestinian issue we will keep going in circles for ever,” he said. He added that it was also the outcome of Benjamin Netanyahu’s need for conflict to stay in office.
“Netanyahu is using this war for political reasons,” Odeh said. “He’s putting everyone in danger in the region with this war, and the war in Gaza. This is the most fascist and dangerous government that we ever had, and it is a danger to everyone.”
Emmanuel Macron has criticised Donald Trump’s threats to take over Greenland as he became the first foreign head of state to visit the vast, mineral-rich Arctic territory since the US president began making explicit threats to annex it.
“I don’t think that’s what allies do,” Macron said as he arrived in the Danish autonomous territory for a highly symbolic visit aimed at conveying “France’s and the EU’s solidarity” with Greenland on his way to a summit of G7 leaders in Canada.
The French president said: “It’s important that Denmark and the Europeans commit themselves to this territory, where the strategic stakes are very high and whose territorial integrity must be respected.”
Trump has said repeatedly the US needs Greenland, which is strategically located at the crossroads between the Atlantic and the Arctic, for US national security reasons, and has refused to rule out the use of force to secure it.
Polls show the vast majority of Greenland’s 57,000 people want independence from Denmark but not to become part of the US. The Danish government has said Greenland “is not for sale” and only Greenlanders can determine their future.
Macron’s six-hour visit was “a signal in itself” and came at the request of both Denmark and Greenland, his office said. It began with talks with the Danish and Greenlandic prime ministers, Mette Frederiksen and Jens-Frederik Nielsen, on a Danish naval frigate.
The French president was also due to visit a glacier to see the effects of global heating, and to discuss how to include Greenland in EU action to aid development while “respecting its sovereignty”. A planned visit to a hydroelectric plant was cancelled.
Macron said before the visit that it was aimed at preventing further “preying” on the territory. In March, the US vice-president, JD Vance, visited the Pituffik US military base on the island, criticising Denmark for not having “done a good job by the people of Greenland” and alleging Copenhagen had neglected the territory’s security.
Pituffik, on the shortest route for missiles fired from Russia at the US, is essential to Washington’s missile defence system; while Greenland’s strategic importance has risen amid a race for rare earths and as melting ice opens up new shipping routes.
The US defence secretary, Pete Hegseth, last week appeared to acknowledge that the Pentagon had developed plans to take over Greenland by force if necessary but refused to answer repeated questions about the subject at a congressional hearing.
The Wall Street Journal reported last month that agency officials under the US national intelligence director, Tulsi Gabbard, were looking into Greenland’s independence movement and sentiment about US resource extraction there.
Frederiksen made several visits to Paris after Trump’s threats against Greenland, which unlike Denmark is not an EU member but has an association agreement with the bloc. Copenhagen has placed orders for French-made surface-to-air missiles.
Florian Vidal of the Paris-based Ifri thinktank said that for Denmark, long one of Washington’s most loyal allies in Europe, enlisting the support of the EU’s only nuclear power was a way to project hard power towards a suddenly more predatory US.
Vidal said: “The Trump administration’s more aggressive posture makes the French vision of Europe, one that is more autonomous, appear more reasonable for Denmark. From a Nordic point of view, France is a military power that counts.”
Nielsen said in April that US statements about Greenland to date had been “disrespectful” and that the island would “never, ever be a piece of property that can be bought by just anyone”.
He said last week that France’s support had been evident “since the first statements about taking our land emerged” and was both “necessary and gratifying”.
Ukraine’s military said on Sunday it had attacked a Russian drone factory in the city of Yelabuga in Russia’s Tatarstan region. The target is around 1,000km from Ukraine. The Ukrainian military general staff said the factory produced, tested, and launched drones at Ukraine, in particular against energy and civil infrastructure. Videos on social media showed an explosion said to be at the factory in Yelabuga, also known as Alabuga, which builds Iranian-designed Shahed drones. The Russian local governor confirmed the attack.
Russian forces hit the Kremenchuk oil refinery in Ukraine’s Poltava region with missiles and drones, Russia’s defence ministry said on Sunday. Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskyy, denounced the attack on the central Poltava region as a vile strike against Ukrainian energy infrastructure, which he said occurred “after the Americans asked us not to strike at Russian energy facilities”. Ukrainian officials said the strikes mainly hit energy, agricultural and civilian installations.
Russian forces have advanced in northern Sumy Oblast and near Kupyansk, Siversk, Chasiv Yar, and Toretsk, according to the Institute for the Study of War. Russia’s defence ministry claimed on Sunday that its forces had taken control of the village of Malynivka in the Donetsk region, known in Russia as Ulyanovka. Zelenskiy said on Saturday that Ukrainian forces had recaptured Andriivka village in north-eastern Sumy as part of a drive to expel Russian forces from the area. Neither side’s claims were independently confirmed.
The Ukrainian office for the return of prisoners of war confirmed on Sunday that Russia had returned 1,200 bodies to Ukraine as part of continuing exchanges.
A building used by Boeing in Kyiv was badly damaged in a recent large-scale Russian air attack, the Financial Times reported on Sunday, citing two Boeing employees, three Ukrainian officials and the head of the American Chamber of Commerce in Ukraine. There had been “no operational disruption”, Andriy Koryagin, deputy general director of Boeing’s operation in Ukraine, told the newspaper, and none of its employees were harmed.
More than 200 Israeli jets were involved in initial air raids on Friday on at least 100 targets in Iran in five waves of strikes, including at the key Natanz nuclear site as well as at ballistic missile sites. Israel also killed at least nine senior Iranian nuclear scientists and a number of officials, including Iran’s most senior military officer and the head of the Revolutionary Guards.
Scores of sites appear to have been attacked in the widening campaign, including in Tehran, Shiraz and Tabriz, and reportedly in Isfahan and Kermanshah.
Strikes at the Natanz nuclear site, Iran’s most significant nuclear enrichment facility, about 135 miles (220km) south-east of Tehran, began at just after 4am local time (0130 BST) on Friday.
Video footage posted online appeared to show the aftermath of explosions.
Protected by heavy concrete walls, Natanz’s centrifuge facilities are underground and the site has been targeted with sabotage operations at multiple locations. Construction work had been under way to expand the site.
Natanz is where Iran has produced much of its nuclear fuel – including a stockpile of highly enriched uranium that the west has suggested could be used in a future nuclear weapon.
Satellite imagery showed significant damage to two areas of the site: the electrical substation that powers it, and the above-ground pilot fuel enrichment plant, which hosts hundreds of centrifuges.
The fuel enrichment plant, which is equipped with about 15,000 centrifuges, appeared to be undamaged. The IAEA said there had been no reported nuclear contamination.
As the Israeli offensive entered its second day, reports suggested that Israel had hit the area of the nuclear fuel enrichment facility at Fordow, which is deep underneath a mountain, causing limited damage. Israel is not believed to have the type of earth-penetrating bombs required to blow up the mountain and crack open the nuclear facility inside. A nuclear research centre in Isfahan was also hit.
Reports suggested Bid Kaneh, which houses several missile development and production sites, was hit on Friday morning as well as the air defence systems in western Iran.
Iran has confirmed a number of senior military figures and scientists were assassinated, some in strikes on private residences.
Iran has also accused Israel of hitting civilian areas during its assassination attempts, including a claim that 60 people were killed in a strike on a residential building in the Farahzad area of Tehran.
Israel’s military said on Saturday it had targeted surface-to-surface missile launchers used to strike Israel and surface-to-air missile infrastructure used to defend Tehran.
Among those killed were the chief of staff of Iran’s armed forces, Maj Gen Mohammad Bagheri, and the commander of the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC), Gen Hossein Salami, suggesting a broader “decapitation” strike aimed at weakening the Iranian regime.
On Saturday morning, strikes were reported at Parchin military base and a jet fighter hangar at Mehrabad airport.
On Sunday, Israel’s military said it had hit “more than 80” targets in Tehran, including Iran’s defence ministry headquarters, “nuclear weapons project” infrastructure sites, and other targets, including fuel tankers. The Iranian oil ministry said Israel had targeted two fuel depots in the Tehran area, including a depot at Shahran, in the capital’s north-west, where large fireballs erupted.
Later on Sunday, Israel’s military said its air force had hit Mashhad airport in north-east Iran, in the longest-range strike of the conflict.
Israel’s strikes have killed at least 406 people in Iran and wounded another 654, according to Human Rights Activists News Agency, a Washington-based rights group that has long tracked Iran. The government in Tehran has not offered overall casualty figures.
Both officers were closely associated with the centres of power in Iran’s security hierarchy, having risen through the ranks after the Iranian revolution in 1979.
Salami began his career in the IRGC in 1980 during the Iran-Iraq war, becoming deputy commander in 2009, then, a decade later, commander of the 125,000-strong force that has played a key role in Iran’s forward foreign policy in the region. Salami had been subject to sanctions by the UN and US for his involvement in Iran’s nuclear and military programmes.
Bagheri, who was in his early 60s, had also risen through the IRGC, fighting in the Iran-Iraq war like Salami, with a background in military intelligence before being appointed chief of staff of the Armed Forces of the Islamic Republic of Iran – the country’s highest military position – in 2016. His position made him, formally at least, the second most powerful figure in Iran after the supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei.
Gholamali Rashid, the deputy commander in chief of the armed forces, was also reported to have been killed. It was reported that Ali Shamkhani, a key adviser to and confidant of Khamenei, was killed in a strike on an apartment block in Tehran, as well as the head of the IRGC’s air force and a number of his senior aides.
Israel has a history of targeting Iranian nuclear scientists, and this attack was no exception, with at least six scientists killed on Friday and three more on Saturday.
The Tasnim news agency named the six scientists killed on Friday, including Mohammad Mehdi Tehranchi, a theoretical physicist who was the president of the Islamic Azad University of Iran.
Also killed was Fereydoun Abbasi, a former head of the Atomic Energy Organization of Iran. Tasnim additionally named Abdolhamid Minouchehr, Ahmadreza Zolfaghari, Amirhossein Feqhi, Motalleblizadeh, as other scientists killed. Iranian state television named the three killed on Saturday as Ali Bakaei Karimi, Mansour Asgari, and Saeed Borji.
Iran has launched a barrage of missiles at Israel, setting off air-raid sirens in Jerusalem and elsewhere. Israeli authorities said on Sunday that 14 people had been killed there since Friday and 390 injured.
These maps show the locations of strikes in both countries since Saturday night.
In northern Israel, rescuers and medics said a strike late on Saturday destroyed a three-storey building in the town of Tamra, killing four women.
Israeli police said six people were killed and at least 180 injured at the site of a missile strike in Bat Yam, near Tel Aviv on Israel’s Mediterranean coast, in the early hours of Sunday morning.
A strike on the central city of Rehovot injured 42 people.
China and Russia are stepping up sabotage operations targeting undersea cables and the UK is unprepared to meet the mounting threat, according to new analysis.
A report by the China Strategic Risks Institute (CSRI) analysed 12 incidents in which national authorities had investigated alleged undersea cable sabotage between January 2021 and April 2025. Of the 10 cases in which a suspect vessel was identified, eight were directly linked to China or Russia through flag-state registration or company ownership.
The involvement of “shadow fleet” commercial vessels in these incidents is consistent with China and Russia’s broader “grey zone” strategy – a space between war and peace – which aims to coerce adversaries while minimising opportunities for response, the report claims.
The patterns of activity – such as the involvement of Chinese vessels in suspicious incidents in the Baltic Sea, and Russian vessels near Taiwan – suggest possible coordination between Moscow and Beijing on undersea cable attacks, it says.
It is estimated that up to 99% of intercontinental data transmission takes place through submarine cable systems, playing a vital role in civilian and defence infrastructure. Without undersea cables, much of the economy – from international banking and cloud computing to virtual communications and global logistics – would cease to function.
The UK acts as a key hub in Euro-Atlantic cable infrastructure and is likely to become a frequent target for future sabotage operations.
But a UK government submission to parliament’s joint committee on the national security strategy has admitted that it has limited capabilities to monitor commercial maritime traffic around undersea cables. The joint committee is mounting an investigation into the threat posed to the underseas cables and the possibility of more secure alternatives.
The Department for Science, Innovation and Technology submission to the committee noted that “the UK has limited capabilities for monitoring general maritime and white [commercial] shipping traffic, as coastal radar only covers about 22% of the exclusive economic zone (EEZ) around the UK.
“The high volume of maritime traffic makes it challenging to identify every instance of abnormal maritime activity. As a result, the current capabilities cannot fully guarantee that all vessels adhere to UK laws and regulations, especially around sensitive infrastructure like undersea cables.”
Andrew Yeh, the executive director of CSRI and author of the report, said: “Undersea cables underpin prosperity and security in the digital age. We cannot afford to be naive about the unprecedented threat that China and Russia’s grey-zone operations pose to the UK’s undersea infrastructure.
“While well set up to deal with conventional threats, the UK’s defence infrastructure is woefully inadequate in protecting against grey-zone tactics. The UK must bolster its monitoring and surveillance capabilities, while looking to partners such as Taiwan who have a wealth of experience in countering grey-zone threats.”
The recent strategic defence review admitted that underwater cables were becoming an increasingly vulnerable maritime domain.
Sign up to This is Europe
The most pressing stories and debates for Europeans – from identity to economics to the environment
after newsletter promotion
The UK is the landing point for 60 undersea cable systems, including nine out of the 15 undersea cables connecting North America to Europe.
This month a Taiwanese court sentenced a Chinese captain of a ship to three years in jail after finding him guilty of intentionally damaging cables off the island in February.
Proof of intent, as opposed to carelessness, is one of the difficulties in pursuing these cases in court. In the Taiwanese case, the Chinese captain said it was a case of negligence.
Much of the law of the sea in relation to these highly sophisticated cables carrying hi-tech data is governed by the Cable Convention passed in 1884.
Baltic Nato countries meeting in January vowed to boost patrol missions after several telecom and power cables were severed in the Baltic Sea in recent months, with experts and politicians accusing a Russian “shadow fleet” of sabotage.
When he appeared in public for the first time in five years in October, Iran’s supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Hosseini Khamenei, had an uncompromising message. Israel “won’t last long”, he told tens of thousands of supporters at a mosque in Tehran in a Friday sermon.
“We must stand up against the enemy while strengthening our unwavering faith,” the 84-year-old told the gathering.
Days before, Israel had killed Hassan Nasrallah, the veteran secretary general of Hezbollah, with huge bombs dropped on the militant Islamist movement’s headquarters in Beirut. The assassination was a personal blow to Khamenei, who had known Nasrallah for decades.
The Israeli air offensive against Iran, launched on Friday, is another such blow. It has prompted more defiance from Tehran, and a barrage of missiles and drones launched at Tel Aviv, but neither appear likely to stop the Israeli attacks. Iran’s air defences are apparently ineffective and the coalition of Islamist militias that Khamenei had built up to deter Israel is effectively shattered.
Khamenei now has few good options – a situation this careful, pragmatic, conservative and ruthless revolutionary has always sought to avoid.
Born the son of a minor cleric of modest means in the eastern Iranian shrine city on Mashhad, Khamenei took his first steps as a radical in the febrile atmosphere of the early 1960s. The then shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi, had launched a major reform project largely rejected by the country’s conservative clergy.
As a young religious student in Qom, a centre of theology, Khamenei had soaked in the traditions of Shia Islam and the radical new thinking of the emerging leader of the conservative opposition, Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini. By the late 1960s, Khamenei was running secret missions for Khomeini, who had been exiled, and organising networks of Islamist activism.
Khamenei soaked up other influences too. Though an avowed aficionado of western literature, particularly Leo Tolstoy, Victor Hugo and John Steinbeck, the young activist was steeped in the anti-colonial ideologies of the time and the anti-western sentiment that often went with them. He met thinkers who sought to meld Marxism and Islamism to create new ideologies, liked works describing the “westoxification” of his country and translated works by Sayyid Qutb, an Egyptian who would inspire generations of Islamist extremists, into Farsi.
Imprisoned repeatedly by Iran’s feared security services, Khamenei was nonetheless able to take part in the vast protests of 1978 that eventually convinced the shah to flee and allowed Khomeini to return. A protege of the implacable cleric, he swiftly rose up the hierarchy of the radical regime that seized power and by 1981, after surviving an assassination attempt that deprived him of the use of an arm, he had won election to the largely ceremonial post of president.
When Khomeini died in 1989, Khamenei was selected as his successor, once the constitution changed to allow someone of lesser clerical qualifications to take on the role and with much greater powers than before. Khamenei swiftly deployed these to consolidate his control over the sprawling and fragmented apparatus of Iran’s post-revolutionary state.
One key power base was the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC), the beating activist heart of the new regime and a powerful military, social and economic force. But Khamenei, as ever, was careful to find other powerful allies and clients too.
Through the 1990s, he further strengthened his grip, eliminating opponents and rewarding those loyal to him. Even poets Khamenei had once professed to admire were targeted by security services. Overseas dissidents were hunted down, and the relationship with Hezbollah, which the IRGC had helped found in the aftermath of the revolution, was reinforced.
At all times he followed his strategy of pragmatically advancing the inflexible principles of the project bequeathed him by his late mentor.
When in 1997, Mohammad Khatami, a reformist candidate won the presidency in a landslide, Khamenei allowed him some freedom of action but worked hard and often forcefully to protect the core of the regime and its ideology from any serious challenge.
Khamenei did not, however, stop Khatami reaching out to Washington in an ultimately abortive effort to establish better relations in the aftermath of the 9/11 attacks in 2001 and, following Khomenei’s example, forswore weapons of mass destruction.
But he also backed the IRGC’s efforts to bleed US forces in Iraq after their 2003 invasion and extend Iranian influence in the neighbouring country. This marked the further extension of his strategy of relying on proxies to project power across the region and deter and threaten Israel, named Little Satan by the revolutionaries in 1979 as the Great Satan of the US.
Khamenei was sceptical of the nuclear deal painstakingly negotiated by Iranian officials with the US and others, but he did not oppose its implementation in 2015. Analysts argue over whether he has sought to restrain or encourage hardliners in the IRGC who have pushed for Iran to acquire a bomb.
Successive waves of unrest and reform efforts have been met with surges of vicious repression alongside continuing harsh treatment of measures targeting women, gay people and religious minorities. This, along with deteriorating economic circumstances, have disillusioned many erstwhile supporters of the regime and broadened existing unrest.
Overseas, Khamenei chose to invest heavily in the so-called axis of resistance – Hamas in Gaza, Hezbollah in Lebanon, the Houthi movement in Yemen and a motley assortment of Islamic militant militias in Syria and Iraq. This may have seemed a clever tactic but it has collapsed under the weight of Israeli attacks, while Iran’s historic alliance with Damascus was ended with the fall of Bashar al-Assad’s regime in December.
Living in a compound with his wife and children on Palestine Street in Tehran, Khamenei has stressed his humble lifestyle. Some sceptics have doubted whether his asceticism is quite as authentic as presented, but his reputation for modesty, which contrasts with the ostentatious wealth of many other officials, has deflected some popular anger.
For more than three decades in power, Khamenei has sought to navigate the pressures of conflicting forces within Iran, to avoid outright war and to preserve Khomeini’s legacy – as well as his own power and that of his immediate loyalists, of course.
He is now ailing. Speculation over a successor is rife. A long career is drawing to a close with an old man’s greatest challenge yet. The brutal balancing act may soon be over.
 The final picture caption in this article was amended on 16 June 2025. An earlier version identified Ali Khamenei and Mohammad Khatami the wrong way round.
Warning: this episode has descriptions of violence and some swearing
As the late afternoon sun streamed into a small square behind the Indian High Commission in London on Sunday, a crowd of 200 people gathered for a vigil – one of several held around the UK this weekend to remember those who died in the Air India disaster.
Candles were placed beneath a bust of Jawaharlal Nehru and attenders listened to inter-faith leaders and members from the Gujarati community who had come to reflect on a shocking week of loss.
Ridhi Sarmah-Kapoor and Olivia Gearson, two students whose fathers had travelled from Gujarat to London recently, laid flowers outside India House in Holborn.
“My dad frequently goes back and forth to India and he uses Air India,” said Sarmah-Kapoor. “It gives it a personal connection – it’s like these people are my family.”
Gearson added: “It needs to be honoured. There were parents coming back for their children’s graduation – we’re both students, it really hit hard.”
Gujarati communities in the capital and other cities including Leicester have been gathering since the crash to commemorate the more than 270 people who died in the crash in Ahmedabad, one of the worst air accidents in Indian history.
There have been remarkable stories, such as the Bristol student who missed the flight because she was held up in traffic and the miraculous tale of the sole survivor, Vishwash Kumar Ramesh. But the details of the lives lost – ambitions and hopes extinguished in an instant – all add to the sense of shock among British-Indians.
“We needed somewhere to mourn,” said Mayur Shikotra, who organised the vigil alongside Pranav Bhanot.
Bhanot said: “We’re only a small community, many people are only one or two degrees away from the tragedy,. There aren’t that many flights that come out of Gujarat directly, so it really could have been anyone. That makes it hit home.”
Much has been made of the close-knit nature of the Gujarati community in the UK, a fact that has made the trauma personal for many.
Narendra Thakerar was among a group of old schoolfriends with Gujarati backgrounds who decided to come and remember those who lost their lives.
“I’ve flown three times in the last six months with Air India,” he said. “It’s a tragedy that no one prepares for, it’s humbling and just a reminder about how fragile we are.”
Bhanot said: “It’s really important that we find out what happened, we need the bodies repatriated and hopefully some compensation for loved ones – it’s never going to bring anyone back but it’d be a recognition of what happened and the loss of life.”
As well as grief, there was a desire for Boeing, the manufacturer of the aircraft, to be held accountable if it was at fault.
“My first thought is the Boeing 787,” said Thakerar, who is glad the fleet is being inspected by the Indian government after the disaster.
Another member of the group, Mahesh Patel, said: “The problem is when you’re dealing with old planes that have been sold and resold and used and used.”
There are more than 1,100 787s in service, with most major international airlines using them and its safety record in service has been good.
Tata Group bought Air India from the Indian government in 2022 and announced plans last year to revamp and upgrade its fleet.
“None of us want this to happen again so there needs to be a thorough investigation,” Thakerar said.
Donald Trump’s “America First” policies are undermining decades of transatlantic cooperation just as Putin’s Russia destabilises Europe with direct military aggression. But these twin shocks have unintentionally accomplished something the EU institutions never could. They have made European integration feel not just important, but existential – a matter of democratic survival – for ordinary citizens.
From Helsinki to Lisbon, people are suddenly experiencing the same existential unease. Trade wars, defence threats and military aggression don’t respect borders. More and more Europeans now recognise that their small, individual nations cannot withstand simultaneous pressure from both Washington and Moscow. They find themselves caught between economic coercion and military intimidation.
Recent Eurobarometer data confirm the shift: 74% of Europeans now view EU membership as a positive thing – the highest level of support ever recorded.
This is a historic opportunity. And yet, EU and national leaders remain paralysed – unable, or unwilling, to convert this public support and shared urgency into political momentum for reducing Europe’s dependence on US military guarantees and economic shelter.
This is the real tragedy: Europe’s governments no longer practise the very ideals they preach. Though the EU still speaks the language of multilateralism and climate leadership, its policy direction and that of most of its member states increasingly mirror Trump’s.
On migration, the EU’s new pact on migration and asylum reframes asylum as a security risk, echoing Trump’s immigration crackdown. On climate, Ursula von der Leyen’s European Commission has quietly dismantled key green deal initiatives and delayed critical legislation, in a deregulatory shift reminiscent of Trump’s EPA rollbacks. Civil society is also under mounting pressure. Just as Trump has targeted non-profits and dissenters, the conservative European People’s party (EPP) – von der Leyen’s political “family” – has launched an unprecedented assault on NGOs, threatening their funding and legitimacy. Even fundamental rights are at risk. The EU’s response to Hungary’s ban on Pride marches and expansion of surveillance powers has been tepid at best – tacitly tolerating democratic backsliding within its own ranks.
But perhaps the most dangerous convergence lies in how power is exercised. Trump governs by executive fiat, sidelining Congress with executive orders. Today’s commission is drifting in a similar direction at the demand of a majority of its member states. It centralises power, pushing through complex “omnibus” packages and bypassing the European parliament most recently in its proposal to rearm the EU.
What we are witnessing is not just a rupture in the transatlantic alliance but something more insidious.
There are signs of an ideological convergence between Trump’s America and today’s European political centre, where parties are increasingly stealing ideas from the far-right – as in Germany – or governing with those parties, directly or indirectly. That is not only the reality in many EU countries but in the EU system itself under von der Leyen.
Despite pledges in her first term to stick to the centre of politics, the commission increasingly relies on the votes of a rightwing majority in the European parliament, formed by conservative and far-right groupings of all stripes. These include the European Conservatives and Reformists (ECR), which used to be considered mainstream conservative but which now brings together Italian prime minister Giorgia Meloni’s Brothers of Italy party with more extreme far-right parties such as France’s Reconquête and the Sweden Democrats. There is also the Patriots for Europe (PfE) group, co-led by Marine Le Pen and Viktor Orbán, and the even more extreme Europe of Sovereign Nations (ESN), dominated by Germany’s Alternative für Deutschland.
The EPP has traditionally allied with socialist and liberal MEPs who as a bloc helped elect von der Leyen last year. But the EPP has recently voted with parties to the right of it, notably to delay a new deforestation law. The same happened on budgetary matters, the recognition of Edmundo González as Venezuela’s president, and more recently in blocking an EU ethics body.
There is also a growing presidentialisation of the commission. During the Covid pandemic, von der Leyen personally negotiated vaccine deals by text message – shielding those discussions from public and parliamentary scrutiny.
The risk is that tolerance of such a shift towards personalised, opaque governance makes it easier to pass to the “Trumpification” stage – where politicians increasingly borrow from the authoritarian playbook, preferring executive fiat over parliamentary democracy.
Sign up to This is Europe
The most pressing stories and debates for Europeans – from identity to economics to the environment
after newsletter promotion
This creeping phenomenon weakens Europe’s ability to respond to the very threats that should be pushing it closer together. Just when European citizens are most willing to support joint action – on Ukraine, Gaza, big tech, or defence – their leaders are failing to respond. What’s missing is the political courage to articulate a compelling alternative to far-right messaging – one that makes an affirmative case for EU-wide action on the issues that matter most to Europeans: common security, managed migration and shared prosperity. This means presenting European integration not as a threat to national identity, but as the means to protect and strengthen it.
When European nations pool their defence capabilities, they don’t surrender sovereignty – they multiply their capacity to defend their communities. When they coordinate migration policies, they don’t open floodgates – they create orderly, humane systems that serve both newcomers and existing communities. When they harmonise economic policies, they don’t level down – they lift up regions and workers who have been left behind. This vision appeals to the same desire for security and belonging that populists exploit, but offers real solutions instead of scapegoats.
This failure to articulate such a vision has real costs. Every month of delay in building European defence capabilities is another month of dependence on an unreliable US. Every compromise with authoritarians – whether in Budapest or Jerusalem – erodes the democratic credibility that makes European leadership possible.
Trump and Putin have inadvertently given Europe a shared sense of purpose and a need for urgent action. The question is not whether Europeans are ready to respond – the polls show they are. The question is whether Europe’s leaders will sleepwalk into irrelevance, or worse.
Alberto Alemanno is the Jean Monnet professor of EU law at HEC Paris and the founder of The Good Lobby
In the ramshackle, cramped lanes of Ambika Nagar in the Indian city of Gujarat, everyone spoke of Pooja and Harshit Patel with pride. The couple had done what none of their relatives or neighbours had managed to achieve before; they had moved abroad, settling among the thriving Gujarati diaspora community in the English city of Leicester.
Their lives in Leicester, where the couple had moved so Pooja could complete her business masters degree – later getting a job at Amazon alongside Harshit – seemed unimaginably glamorous to their relatives and close-knit community back in India.
Pooja would call her mother, 58-year-old Chandra Mate, at least three times a day with tales of British life and to show off her latest outfits, spinning in front of the mirror.
Mate, who had never left India and had spent most of her life in this small two-bedroom house in Ahmedabad, lived for these calls. Collectively Pooja and Harshit’s families, who came from humble backgrounds, had spent every penny, sold every piece of ancestral land and jewellery and pooled every resource to get their children to the UK and to pay for Pooja’s degree.
When the couple arrived back in India, surprising their families with the first visit in two years, they were greeted like celebrities.
“When I saw her after two years, it was a kind of joy I had never known,” said Mate, wiping away her tears. “The entire neighbourhood came out to greet her and Harshit. Her glow, her presence – everything about her had changed.” By the time they started their journey home, it took almost an hour for them to say goodbye to everyone in the lane.
Yet they never made it back to Leicester. Less than a minute after their Air India 171 flight from Ahmedabad to London lifted off from the tarmac, air traffic control received a panicked message over the radio from the plane’s flight deck. “Thrust not achieved. Falling. Falling. Mayday. Mayday.” Then the radio went dead.
Within seconds, the 227-tonne Boeing 787 Dreamliner plane, which had reached a height of 650ft, fell to the ground, exploding into a fireball. The cause of the crash remains a mystery to the authorities and aviation experts, and an investigation is under way.
Now Pooja and Harshit’s bodies lie in the morgue of Civil hospital Ahmedabad, alongside at least 270 others who died in the crash, including fellow passengers and victims on the ground. For their parents, the grief of the disaster has been compounded by an ongoing, excruciating delay in getting the remains of their children back.
Authorities and forensic science experts have been at pains to emphasise what a complex and gargantuan task it is to correctly identify those who died in the crash, with bodies still being uncovered from the site over the weekend.
Many were charred and dismembered far beyond recognition and a lengthy exercise to match relatives’ DNA samples to remains has had authorities working overnight for three days, with only about 47 matches made so far.
By Sunday morning, Harshit and Pooja’s families had a small glimmer of hope, believing that both bodies had been identified. They planned to bring them home and made reservations at the local crematorium, to burn them as per Hindu traditions. But by the afternoon, devastating news was delivered: only Harshit’s remains had been confirmed by the hospital.
Harshit, 33, and Pooja, 28, had been devoted to each other since they got married eight years ago. Theirs was what is known in India as a love marriage, rather than one arranged by their families, which is still seen as relatively unusual.
Through sobs, Harshit’s father, Anil Patel, said he would not pick up one body without the other. “In life they were inseparable,” he said. “I cannot separate them in death. We will only cremate them together.”
At a press conference with government and hospital officials on Sunday evening, Pooja’s uncle stood up and angrily demanded to know where her body was. Officials admitted it could take another three, even four more days for some bodies to be identified.
Gathered together in Ambika Nagar, the couple’s families were broken with exhaustion and grief. Before moving to the UK, Pooja had been so worried about Anil being alone – his wife had died of cancer six years ago – that she had insisted he move in with her family. Their two families now share a single home. Dozens of relatives sat in its two small rooms in collective mourning.
As they sat, they shared their final memories of the pair. Pooja had recently suffered a miscarriage, which had left her devastated, but her older sister Aarti Atul Mukture recalled how her sister had arrived in May full of joy and bearing armfuls of gifts for everyone. As Pooja had left for Leicester, she promised her mother to finally buy her a washing machine to ease her domestic burdens.
Mate was filled with regret that she did not take her daughter to the airport due to the suffocating summer heat. “If only I had gone to drop her off, I would’ve had a few more hours with her,” she said, breaking down again.
Yet even as they waited anxiously for the bodies to be returned, Anil knew that another episode of pain likely awaited when they finally received them.
Officials told the families that they would most likely receive the bodies in “kits”, rather than coffins, as they were so badly burned, dismembered and decomposed. They have been banned from opening them, and will have to cremate them under police supervision.
“We won’t even be able to see their faces. Not one last time,” he said with a sob.
President Donald Trump vetoed an Israeli plan in recent days to kill Iran’s supreme leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, two US officials told Reuters on Sunday.
“Have the Iranians killed an American yet? No. Until they do we’re not even talking about going after the political leadership,” said one of the sources, a senior US administration official.
The officials, speaking on condition of anonymity, said top US officials had been in constant communications with Israeli officials in the days since Israel launched a massive attack on Iran in an attempt to halt its nuclear program.
They said the Israelis reported that they had an opportunity to kill the top Iranian leader, but Trump waved them off of the plan.
The officials would not say whether Trump himself delivered the message. But Trump has been in frequent communication with the Israeli prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu.
When asked about Reuters report, Netanyahu, in an interview on Sunday with Fox News Channel’s Special Report With Bret Baier, said: “There’s so many false reports of conversations that never happened, and I’m not going to get into that.
“But I can tell you, I think that we do what we need to do, we’ll do what we need to do. And I think the United States knows what is good for the United States,” Netanyahu said.
Trump has been holding out hope for a resumption of US-Iranian negotiations over Tehran’s nuclear program. Talks that had been scheduled for Sunday in Oman were canceled as a result of the strikes.
Trump told Reuters on Friday that “we knew everything” about the Israeli strikes.
It was just past 4pm when Nahid’s* windows began to shake. An Israeli bomb hit a building nearby – she could not see where – and soon her house began to fill up with smoke. It was the third day of Israeli bombing of Iran and the situation in Tehran was just getting worse.
“This is a massacre. The blasts haven’t stopped. Children are crying and we fear many civilians have been killed. There’s a smell of death in the air. I can’t stop crying,” Nahid*, a 25-year-old finance analyst at an e-commerce company in Tehran, told the Guardian via text.
Residents began to flee Tehran and head towards the countryside on Sunday as Israeli attacks on the Iranian capital escalated, with bombs raining down on residential and government buildings alike. Authorities gave no official death toll, but at least 138 people have been killed and hundreds wounded by strikes on Iran since Friday.
The bombing started early on Friday morning when Israel launched hundreds of strikes in what it said was an operation aimed at preventing Iran from obtaining a nuclear weapon. Iran quickly responded with a barrage of ballistic missiles and has continued to hit Israel, killing 10 people, including three children, in strikes on residential buildings on Saturday night.
As the conflict continued to escalate, Iranian authorities announced they would open Tehran’s metro stations and schools to use as shelters.
“Unfortunately, we in Tehran and in other cities do not have shelters,” said Mehdi Chamran, the chair of the city council, as he urged civilians to use tunnels and basements as makeshift bomb shelters.
The ferocity of the Israeli assault caught Iran’s citizens and government by surprise, as Israel’s jets flew with virtual freedom over Iranian skies. While Iranian missiles flew towards Israel, its military seemed incapable of stopping Israeli attacks.
“We are not confident mosques, schools or metro stations will be safe. What if we get buried under? My sisters and I are going to urge my parents and neighbours to leave home,” Nahid said.
There were scenes of chaos on Tehran’s streets as residents rushed to buy food amid bombings before shops shut.
“People are running around in the streets and screaming. It’s extremely dangerous to step outside now but we don’t have an option,” said Reza*, a student at the University of Tehran. The 21-year-old described long lines at petrol stations as he and others filled their cars before making the journey out of the city.
While residents queued for fuel, or for cash at ATMs, a sense of panic began to spread as the strikes were joined by car-bombings, reportedly targeting Iranian nuclear scientists. People struggled to contact their loved ones as Iran’s mobile phone network failed, giving only sporadic coverage.
Experts said Israel’s attack had come at a critical point for the Iranian government, which has been rocked by protests in recent years and by a deepening economic crisis.
“This war comes at a most acute situation domestically, because we have the gravest economic crisis for decades,” said Dr Ali Fathollah-Nejad, the founder and director of the Center for Middle East and Global Order.
Prices of food and other essential goods have rocketed over the past year as the Iran’s currency, the rial, rapidly depreciated. Trump quickly signed an executive order after retaking office in January that tightened sanctions against Iran, choking off oil exports from the already beleaguered economy.
Fathollah-Nejad said the economic crisis had been one of the key factors alongside military pressure that pushed the Iranian government towards diplomacy with the US, with which it had been negotiating over its nuclear programme for the past couple of months.
Iranians took to social media to mock the government’s lack of preparedness, sharing videos of top military officials saying Israel would never dare to attack Iran. Officials had previously trumpeted Iran’s ability to deter strikes through its fierce military capabilities.
Within Iran, state TV replayed footage of Iranian strikes on Israel and played down the impact of Israeli attacks. The feeling of being under attack has prompted a sense of unity among some Iranians.
“We have been hearing the rumours of regime change, especially by the Israelis and Americans. It seems more like a joke,” said Hadi*, a Tehran resident in his 60s.
He added that among his friends, those who were initially against Iran developing nuclear weapons now felt the country needed an atomic arsenal to defend itself from Israel.
“Many Iranians may criticise the government and object to the strategies, but history has proven that Iranians unite when attacked by a foreign country,” Hadi said.
* Some names have been changed
European leaders gathering for a G7 summit with Donald Trump in the Canadian Rockies plan to spend the opening day asking Trump to justify his confidence that Israel and Iran will make a deal that will mean “peace soon”.
As the military exchanges worsen and the death toll mounts on both sides, European leaders are intending to pin the US president down on his whole Iran strategy, including getting a definitive response on whether he will use his influence over Israel’s prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, to call a ceasefire, or instead let the war run its course.
Trump’s largely unsubstantiated remarks about “peace soon” suggest he believes a ceasefire could be imminent, even though Jerusalem appears determined to wipe out not just Iran’s nuclear programme but its entire security apparatus.
A return to diplomacy would allow the rescheduling of US talks with Iran on its civil nuclear programme that had been set for Sunday but were cancelled after Israel launched its assault on Thursday night.
The stumbling block has been the US insistence that Iran forgoes the right to enrich uranium inside Iran.
It is possible that the G7 collectively will issue a joint statement calling for de-escalation, but there are differences of emphasis between the leaders on how far to support Israel’s attack, with Germany the most supportive and Japan the most critical.
The Israel-Iran hostilities – and their potential to upend the world economy – have at least initially usurped the G7 summit agenda, which had been set to be dominated by disputes over the war in Ukraine and US tariffs.
In an attempt to avoid public conflict, Canada, the summit host, has dropped the idea of a joint communique, and wants the seven leaders to focus on critical mineral supply lines, artificial intelligence, China and energy security.
A total of 15 world leaders are due to attend the two-and-a-half-day gathering in Kananaskis, just south of the Canadian resort town of Banff.
In a close echo of Europe’s largely unsuccessful efforts to make Trump more resolute in demanding a ceasefire from Russia in Ukraine, European leaders want to see if the US president has a plan for de-escalation for the conflict – beyond Israel weakening Iran so it is forced to return to the negotiating table. So far they have found Washington’s messages to be contradictory.
The French president, Emmanuel Macron; the German chancellor, Friedrich Merz; the Canadian prime minister, Mark Carney; and the UK prime minister, Keir Starmer, are trying to find a common line on Iran that goes beyond broad calls for de-escalation and restraint. Only Macron has attended a G7 summit before.
On the way to the summit, which formally starts on Monday, Merz called for diplomacy to be given space but said Iran must not have nuclear weapons and urged it to stop bombing civilian targets in Israel.
Starmer spoke with leaders of the United Arab Emirates, the Gulf state with closest ties to Israel. The UAE is doubtful that Israel’s attack will lead to the fall of the Iranian regime, but as its air and intelligence superiority grows more evident, Israel is more open that this is the moment for Iranians to end the regime.
France, Germany and the UK, previously closely involved in the talks on Iran’s nuclear programme, have been left in the cold by Trump, who insisted on seeking a bilateral deal with Iran.
With so many pressing issues on the agenda, Europe will be cautious in deciding how much political capital to expend on pressing Trump into demanding a ceasefire.
Sign up to Headlines Europe
A digest of the morning's main headlines from the Europe edition emailed direct to you every week day
after newsletter promotion
Iran’s foreign minister, Abbas Araghchi, has said Israel’s attacks were intended to sabotage diplomacy and that Iran’s counterattacks will cease as soon as Israel’s barrage ends. “If the aggression stops, our reaction will also end,” Araghchi briefed foreign diplomats in Tehran on Sunday.
Tehran denied a Cypriot claim that it had been asked to send private messages to the US, or that it had told intermediaries that the talks due to have been held in Oman would have been productive.
Trump, as he has in the past, has blown hot and cold, praising Israel’s offensive as excellent while denying Iranian allegations that the US has taken part in the attacks – an assurance Iran does not find credible. He told Tehran not to widen its retaliation to include US facilities or interests.
Speaking after a phone call with the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, he said: “We can easily get a deal done between Iran and Israel, and end this bloody conflict.”
He gave no details, but the sticking point in the talks had been whether the US would permit Iran to retain a residual domestic uranium enrichment programme.
Europe’s fear is that the conflict is quickly spiralling out of control, and that the Israeli government’s agenda is not just to expunge any traces of Iran’s nuclear sites but to attempt to trigger regime change in Tehran. Israel has denied this.
Sir Richard Dearlove, the former head of MI6, said: “I think regime change is on the cards. I think the Israelis will take out the supreme leader if they can, as they took out [Hezbollah leader] Hassan Nasrallah in Beirut.”
There will be growing pressure on Iran’s current leadership to conclude that only nuclear weapons can protect Iran, making it more likely that the west would support an attempt to engineer the fall of the theocratic regime.
With its “axis of resistance”, or forward defence strategy, in disarray due to assaults on Hamas and Hezbollah, and with Israel enjoying near impunity in the skies above Iran, Tehran is left dependent on its missile supply stock holding out and the security of its Fordow nuclear plant buried deep underground in the mountains north-east of Qom.
Iran’s foreign minister has accused Israel of seeking to expand the war beyond Iran by attacking a major gas facility in Bushehr province on the Gulf coast.
Speaking to diplomats in his first public appearance since the initial Israeli strikes, Abbas Araghchi said: “Dragging the conflict into the Persian Gulf is a strategic mistake and its goal is to drag the war outside Iranian territory. Any military development in this region can affect the entire world.”
He was referring to the strike on a facility operating at South Pars, located offshore near Iran’s southern Bushehr province. The field supplies about 70% of Iran’s domestic natural gas.
The South Pars/North Dome mega-field is the largest known gas reserve in the world. Iran, which shares the field with Qatar, has been developing its side since the late 1990s.
Iranian media reported on Saturday a “massive explosion” and fire after an Israeli drone targeted one of the South Pars facilities.
Araghchi added that Iran blamed the US for allowing Israel to start the war with Iran, but at present its conflict was confined to Israel, and Iran would not expand it to neighbouring countries, or to US facilities.
“Over the past two days, we have received messages from the US through various channels claiming that they were not and will not be involved in this attack,” he said. “However, we do not believe this claim, because we have evidence to the contrary.
“If the US government really makes such a claim, it should clearly and publicly state its position. Sending a private message is not enough.”
On Friday, Israel launched a large-scale attack on Iran, killing top military commanders and nuclear scientists, and striking military bases, nuclear sites and residential areas across the country.
Iran has since unleashed a deadly barrage of missile strikes on Israel, leaving at least 10 Israelis dead overnight Sunday and dozens more wounded.
“It is necessary for the US government to clearly condemn the attack on nuclear facilities,” Iran’s leading diplomat said. “Such an action must be condemned from the perspective of international law.”
Araghchi was explaining why talks due with the US in Oman on Sunday had been cancelled, as well as justifying the Iranian response to Israel’s attacks as legitimate self-defence.
He also disclosed that Tehran had asked for an emergency board meeting of the UN nuclear inspectorate the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) on Monday at which Iran plans to raise the Israeli attack on its Natanz nuclear facility.
He said Iran had not intended to target Israeli economic positions, but had been forced to do so on the second day in response to attacks on its oil installations.
Iranian foreign ministry sources believe Israel has clearly set out that its plan is to secure political regime change in Tehran, and it would be up to other European powers to say whether they agree with such steps.
In his Tehran briefing, Araghchi thanked countries that had condemned the Israeli attack but said “there are countries in Europe that claimed to be civilised and adhere to international law, but instead of condemning Israel, have condemned Iran”.
He also said he had requested a meeting of the IAEA on Monday after Israel’s attack on the Natanz nuclear facility.


Climate breakdown is usually held up as the biggest, most urgent threat humans pose to the future of the planet today.
But what if there was another, greater, human-made threat that could snuff out not only human civilisation, but practically the entire biosphere, in the blink of an eye?
As you read this, about 4,000 nuclear weapons are poised for a first strike across the northern hemisphere, enough atomic firepower to kill as many as 700 million people from blasts and burning alone.
And that is just the start. The explosions and fires – like nothing seen on Earth since the comet strike that led to the Cretaceous mass extinction – would loft enough soot into the stratosphere to cast an impenetrable shadow over the globe. No light means no photosynthesis, the basis of planetary foodwebs. No heat means that the surface of the Earth would plunge into an icy, years-long winter.
That is the message of Mark Lynas, a British writer who for two decades has worked to help people understand the science of climate breakdown while pushing for action on carbon emissions. But after three years of research for a new book, published last month, he now sees nuclear war as an even greater threat.
“There’s no adaptation options for nuclear war,” Lynas said. “Nuclear winter will kill virtually the entire human population. And there’s nothing you can do to prepare, and there’s nothing you can do to adapt when it happens, because it happens over the space of hours.
“It is a vastly more catastrophic, existential risk than climate change.”
Lynas got started on his work on nuclear war in 2022, soon after Russia’s full-scale invasion of Ukraine. Like many born into the era of the cold war, he was aware of the concept of nuclear winter – the likely environmental impact of a global thermonuclear exchange. But what emerged from his research was far more horrifying.
As the rest of the world gradually forgot about the nuclear threat, researchers began applying the new models of climate science – the same ones used to predict the developing threat of climate breakdown – to understand its dramatic implications.
“The burning of the cities is the mechanism that causes nuclear winter,” Lynas said. “You get soot that’s lofted through pyrocumulonimbus clouds – big, fire-generated thunder clouds – which pump [it], like a chimney, into the stratosphere.
“Once it gets above the tropopause, into the stratosphere, it can’t be rained out. And because it’s dark coloured, it catches the sun, heats up and gets higher and higher. It gets probably totally dark at the surface for weeks, if not months.”
The temperature rapidly drops below freezing. And it stays there, for years. “There’s never another harvest for humanity. The food will never grow again. Because by the time the sun comes back out and temperatures rise again, within a decade or so, everyone’s dead.”
How likely is this scenario? Surely no one could be so reckless as to start a nuclear war? Actually, says Lynas, they could. After all, the US did use nuclear weapons against civilians in Japan in 1945, and since then there have been numerous moments when the world stood minutes from nuclear war, whether by accident or brinkmanship. Today, both the US and Russia have espoused first-strike doctrines that threaten the use of nuclear weapons even against conventional attacks (China, notably, has a policy of “no first use”).
Meanwhile, nuclear weapons continue to proliferate. The US and Russia hold the biggest arsenals, with about 12,000 between them. China is racing to catch up, with an estimated 500 as of 2024. Also armed are Britain, France, Israel, India, Pakistan and North Korea, with Iran apparently on the cusp developing its own weapon – a step that onlookers fear it may be more likely to take after last week’s attacks by Israel.
And the potential for error is also high. If US early warning systems went off, its nuclear doctrine would give Donald Trump six minutes to decide whether it was a glitch (which has happened) or to respond in kind. Russia is said to have a “dead hand” system that would launch ballistic missiles automatically in the event its own command and control structures were disabled.
So what can be done? We could stop ignoring it, for a start. Lynas calls for the revival of an anti-nuclear weapons movement on a scale to match that of the present-day climate movement, although he has criticisms of past such movements.
“On the success side, it had some very dedicated people who devoted their whole lives to this issue, in quite large numbers,” he said. “But it was also politically very, very left of centre, very kind of hippy, peace movement type thing – women-only spaces. And that kind of stuff, of course, then means that anyone who’s politically centrist or right centre isn’t involved.
“And if you have a very narrow political base in your movement, you’re going to have a very narrow success rate.”
Lynas disavows unilateral nuclear disarmament as naive, and maintains – unlike previous anti-nuclear campaigners – that nuclear power is not only not a threat, but possibly a massive benefit to human civilisation, not least because of its potential for producing low-carbon energy.
Nevertheless, some of his suggestions are quite radical, including treating everyone in the chain of command in the “nuclear nine” states, from leaders down, as a potential war criminal, subject to legal restrictions and sanctions in states that choose not to hold nuclear weapons.
In spite of all the grim possibilities, Lynas sees hope – and in unusual places. “Trump gets credit for basically shaking things up in a way which could lead to a more positive outcome,” he said. Much as it took another Republican president, Ronald Reagan, to kickstart the US and Soviet disarmament of the 1980s, so Trump could do what Democrats, eager to prove their strength, could – or would – not.
“And you know, maybe his bromance with [Vladimir] Putin and Kim Jong-un or whatever will bring them to the table.”
Six Minutes to Winter was published in May by Bloomsbury.
The former French president Nicolas Sarkozy has been stripped of his Legion of Honour, the country’s highest distinction, after his conviction for corruption was confirmed last year, according to an official decree published on Sunday.
The conservative one-term president has been beset by legal problems since leaving office in 2012. In December France’s highest court upheld his conviction for influence peddling and corruption, ordering him to wear an electronic ankle tag for 12 months.
Sarkozy, who remains an important figure in French politics, had been found guilty by a lower court in 2021 of trying to bribe a judge and peddling influence in exchange for confidential information about an investigation into his 2007 campaign finances.
Sarkozy, whose electronic tag was removed this month, has taken the case to the European court of human rights for appeal. His lawyer, Patrice Spinosi, said he had taken note of the award’s revocation but stressed that the appeal was still pending.
An eventual ECHR ruling against France would “imply reviewing the criminal conviction against [Sarkozy], as well as his exclusion from the order of the Legion of Honour”, Spinosi said on Sunday.
Emmanuel Macron argued against the decision, but the rules of France’s top state award stipulate that any recipient definitively sentenced to a term in prison equal to or greater than a year will be excluded from the order.
The French president, who is known to meet Sarkozy regularly, had argued that his predecessor had been elected to the country’s highest office and it was “very important that former presidents are respected”.
The only previous former president to have had his Legion of Honour revoked was the Nazi collaborator Philippe Pétain, the head of France’s wartime Vichy regime, who was convicted in August 1945 of high treason and conspiring with the enemy.
Others to have been stripped of the honour include the former Syrian president Bashar al-Assad, the seven-time Tour de France winner Lance Armstrong, who was found to have used performance-enhancing drugs, and the film producer Harvey Weinstein, convicted of sexual abuse against women.
Sign up to This is Europe
The most pressing stories and debates for Europeans – from identity to economics to the environment
after newsletter promotion
Sarkozy’s legal woes are not yet over. He has been convicted of illegal campaign financing in his failed 2012 re-election bid, and is currently on trial on charges of accepting illegal campaign financing from the late Libyan dictator Muammar Gaddafi.
The court is expected to deliver its verdict in the latter case in September, and prosecutors have asked for a seven-year prison term. Sarkozy denies the charges.
This was not inevitable. This is a war Israel chose. It could have been prevented. Diplomatic talks were ongoing when the bombers took off for Iran. Israel’s continuing, illegal, unjustified airstrikes are unlikely to achieve their stated aim – permanently ending Tehran’s presumed efforts to build nuclear weapons – and may accelerate it. They must stop now. Likewise, Iran must halt its retaliation immediately and drop its escalatory threats to attack US and UK bases.
This conflict is not limited, as was the case last year, to tit-for-tat exchanges and “precision strikes” on a narrow range of military targets. It’s reached a wholly different level. Potentially nothing is off the table. Civilians are being killed on both sides. Leaders are targets. The rhetoric is out of control. With Israel fighting on several fronts, and Iran’s battered regime backed against a wall, the Middle East is closer than ever to a disastrous conflagration.
Reasons can always be found to go to war. The roots of major conflicts often reach back decades – and this is true of the Israel-Iran vendetta, which dates to the 1979 Islamic revolution. The so-called “shadow war” between the two intensified in recent years. Yet all-out conflict had been avoided, until now. So who is principally to blame for this sudden, unprecedented explosion?
Answer: three angry old men whose behaviour raises serious doubts about their judgment, common sense, motives and even their sanity.
The fact that one of them – Benjamin Netanyahu, Israel’s prime minister – has actively sought a showdown with Iran for years does not mean it had to happen. The fact the Tehran regime is unusually vulnerable after Israel’s attacks last year and the defeat of its Hezbollah ally does not somehow legitimise a surprise assault on its sovereign soil. It’s true that UN nuclear inspectors say Iran is breaking treaty obligations. But that doesn’t amount to a green light for war.
Netanyahu, 75, is unfit to lead Israel, let alone make life-or-death decisions on its behalf. He failed to protect Israelis from the 2023 terror attacks, then dodged responsibility. He has failed to fulfil his vow to destroy Hamas and bring back the hostages, yet his soldiers have killed more than 55,000 Palestinians in Gaza in the process. He invaded Lebanon and Syria. Now it’s Iran. Where will he stop? Will he fight Turkey next? It’s not out of the question.
War is Netanyahu’s choice. It’s what gets him out of bed in the morning. It’s what keeps him and his UK-sanctioned far-right cronies in office and out of jail. His actions have inflicted extraordinary damage on his country’s reputation, fuelling antisemitism globally. He claims Israel is fighting for its existence – but his own political survival is a prime consideration, too. Netanyahu has been indicted for alleged war crimes in Gaza. He should be arrested, not defended and enabled, before any more crimes are committed.
Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, Iran’s bellicose supreme leader, is the second leading culprit. He should have been put out to grass in Qom years ago. The 86-year-old squats atop a repressive, corrupt theocratic regime that has lost touch with the society and people it ostensibly serves. Elections are fixed, judges are bent, media censorship is pervasive. The regime’s military incompetence, economic mismanagement and brutal persecution of young women, gay men and human rights defenders such as Nasrin Sotoudeh are notorious.
Like Netanyahu, Khamenei is backed by hardline conservatives and opposed by reformers, but it’s him who calls the shots. His suspicious insistence on stepping up uranium enrichment, even though civil applications are lacking, ultimately gave Netanyahu an opening. Although he is said to be unwell, Khamenei is a key reason why Iran will not abandon its nuclear programme. Even without him, Netanyahu’s idea that it can be totally eliminated is fantasy.
This blindspot may be the regime’s final undoing. Israel’s strikes have killed senior military leaders and damaged nuclear facilities and ballistic missile and drone forces. Khamenei himself, and Iran’s vital energy exports, may be next. In a patronising video, Netanyahu urged Iranians to rise up and seize their “freedom”. Many would like to. The difficulty with such advice, coming from a tainted source, is that it could have the opposite effect of rallying the public, and Arab leaders, around the regime.
Iran’s threats to attack US, British and French bases and ships if they help defend Israel, and to close the strait of Hormuz, heighten the risk of full-scale war and a global energy shock that could hurt the west and benefit Russia. These are some of the direct consequences of Donald Trump’s weak, vacillating stance.
Trump, 79, is the third man in this avoidable tragedy. He previously said he preferred to negotiate a new nuclear deal with Iran, having idiotically trashed the previous one. But he couldn’t decide on terms, and his amateurish negotiators kept changing their position. That was partly because Trump, as with Palestine and Ukraine, is too idle to study the details. He wings it instead, trusting to instincts that are invariably bad. That makes him easy prey for wily operators such as Netanyahu.
Trump’s feeble ineptitude meant that when Israel’s leader insisted last week that the time was right for an all-out attack on Iran, he folded. Typically, once the attack began, he switched, trying to claim credit and issuing flatulent threats of his own. Each time he opens his mouth, Trump inadvertently confirms Iran’s suspicions that the US and Israel are acting in close concert.
An urgent message for Keir Starmer: anyone who still thinks Trump has even the remotest idea what he’s doing when confronting the big international questions of the day should study the alarming events of the past week. Whether he is selling out to Vladimir Putin, weaponising tariffs, botching a Gaza ceasefire or bullying neighbours, Trump is a total menace. Far better, and safer, for Britain to bypass him and try as much as possible to act independently of the US from now on.
These angry old men could get us all killed.
Simon Tisdall is a Guardian foreign affairs commentator
Millions of protestors gathered across the US on Saturday across thousands of events to protest against Donald Trump’s administration in a planned series of events called “No Kings”.
Organized by a coalition of groups, the demonstrations were largely peaceful, though they occurred on the same day Minnesota lawmakers were shot, and one killed, in political violence, and just a week after the federal government ordered military to descend on Los Angeles streets to quell protests there.
The Guardian spoke to dozens of protesters across the country about the mass demonstrations. Here is what they said.
A 56-year-old chef, originally from Argentina
“Other people have the right to work hard and make a life for themselves when they come from a country where they can’t do that or are facing political oppression or are desperate,” he said.  “This is supposed to be the land of opportunity and a land built on immigrants.” 
“It’s a perverse show of power, unnecessarily,” he said of Trump’s military parade in Washington. “For the most part, the administration is pushing forth an agenda and people have been asleep at the wheel.”
Major, 71, is an honorably discharged Vietnam veteran. Rusty is a retired chemical company employee
Major said that he was there to protest everything that Trump has done over the past several decades, “including not letting Black people rent his apartments in New York and arresting people for no reason just because they’re people of color”.
“Being a veteran during the Vietnam era, I know a couple of guys who died in combat to fight for the things that Trump is destroying now.” 
“If you don’t stand up and make your voices heard, then change won’t happen,” Rusty said. “What he’s doing is shredding our constitution, our government.” 
Forty-five-year-old e-commerce worker
“There’s a decline at the top of the country’s leadership in respecting the laws of the land that were designed to guard against the abuses that they are committing against the people who live here.” 
Dunphy said that he was protesting against the “kidnapping by un-uniformed agents of quasi legal agencies,” Dunphy said. “That’s an 18th-century problem that we shouldn’t be dealing with in the 21st century. There’s a disregard of due process.”
Dunphy said he hoped that the nationwide protests would encourage elected officials to vocally oppose Trump’s presidency. “My assessment of the past five months is that it’s a dismantling of a government that we’ve worked so hard to build in response to the unjust way things used to be.”
Minneapolis based accountant
McGowan carried a sign with the names of the two lawmakers – Melissa Hortman and John Hoffman – and a red heart. He made it this morning after the news broke about the shootings. “We all know, for Americans, that democracy doesn’t come with a guarantee of safety, and that you fight for that kind of thing,” he said. 
“We are all affected by not just by political violence, but all violence in our lives. And there’s way too much of it – way too much gun violence, way too much television hate, way too much inhumanity to your neighbors, and we need to push back on that and to contribute civility to our common good.”
Art conservationist
Normally, she said, when you attend a rally, you feel pumped up and recommitted to the cause. “It’s like some of that, plus mourning. It’s just horrifying, and it’s all so upsetting,” Cheronis said. 
“It’s really sad, especially someone who was not even a divisive character, a complete and total public servant, who had no dreams of going to Washington or some bigger stage, really just kind of working hard for the people,” she said of Hortman.
Mental health therapist
“Our flag has been conscripted by Maga, as though theirs is the only true patriotism,” one volunteer, mental health therapist Laura Gustavson, said, with an American flag. “We’re saying we’re taking the flag back. It’s part of our constitutional representation.”
Seventeen-year-old high school student
“I want to represent my Mexican culture, but I’m an American as well,” said said Sanchez, whose flag bore the images of the US flag and Mexican flag side by side
Miles, 64, and Urie, 74, traveled from Vermon
Miles wore a sandwich board reading “$30M TAKEN FROM OUR MILITARY”.  Urie’s board said “IT’S NOT ABOUT LEFT VS RIGHT. IT’S ABOUT RIGHT VS WRONG”. Despite the seemingly overwhelmingly pro-Trump orientation of the crowd, the pair said they had received a positive reception from some soldiers.
“People said they appreciated us making our view known,” Miles said. 
Army veteran, 40, who served in Iraq
“America does not do military parades like this,” he said. “Everything is just authoritarianism. He’s try to create chaos and become a dictator.”
“This is the nation’s capital. This is exactly where we need to protest.”
Donald Trump loyalist Ric Grenell says he would “have to” strongly consider running for California governor in 2026 if former vice-president Kamala Harris signs up to campaign for the position.
Grenell – a foreign policy adviser to the president and the interim director of Washington DC’s John F Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts – made the remark during an interview airing Sunday on the Politico podcast The Conversation with Dasha Burns.
“If Kamala runs, I think there’s a whole bunch of Republicans who are going to have to look at it – not just me,” Grenell said to Burns in preview materials published ahead of the interview. “If she runs, it is going to make me have to take a look at it.”
Grenell told Burns, “Right now, I’m not running for governor” – but he did say he had recently spoken to Trump about entering the race. He declined to share details about the conversation, which he brought up as Trump vocally criticized California governor Gavin Newsom’s response to anti-immigration and customs enforcement (Ice) protests in Los Angeles.
Newsom, who is not running for re-election because of term limits, has since sued Trump over his decision to send in military personnel to LA amid the Ice protests.
Politico reported in March that Harris was weighing a run to succeed Newsom, her fellow Democrat, after she lost the presidential election in November to Trump. Citing sources close to her, the outlet added that Harris – a former US senator for California – was giving herself until the end of the summer to make a final decision.
California’s Republicans “would love” Harris to run for governor because they believe it might vault the race into the national conversation and “create a fundraising bonanza” that could benefit them in what is otherwise a staunchly Democratic state, Politico has also written.
Grenell has a home in the LA area. He has previously been an ambassador to Germany, acting director of national intelligence and Trump’s envoy for special missions. He was more recently involved in securing the release of Americans detained in Venezuela. And, in February, Trump made him the interim director of the Kennedy Center.
In his talk with Burns, Grenell also addressed the mixed reaction that greeted Trump Wednesday when he attended a performance of Les Misérables at the Kennedy Center.
Grenell maintained that the Kennedy Center is “much more tolerant” nowadays despite boos being directed at Trump on Wednesday, when he also got some cheers.
“We want people here who sit next to each other, who voted for somebody completely different for president,” Grenell, the first openly gay person to lead the US intelligence community, said to Burns. “No one gets vocal and no one gets into an argument because we’re watching Les Mis.
“You know – that’s the whole idea of tolerance.”
This was not inevitable. This is a war Israel chose. It could have been prevented. Diplomatic talks were ongoing when the bombers took off for Iran. Israel’s continuing, illegal, unjustified airstrikes are unlikely to achieve their stated aim – permanently ending Tehran’s presumed efforts to build nuclear weapons – and may accelerate it. They must stop now. Likewise, Iran must halt its retaliation immediately and drop its escalatory threats to attack US and UK bases.
This conflict is not limited, as was the case last year, to tit-for-tat exchanges and “precision strikes” on a narrow range of military targets. It’s reached a wholly different level. Potentially nothing is off the table. Civilians are being killed on both sides. Leaders are targets. The rhetoric is out of control. With Israel fighting on several fronts, and Iran’s battered regime backed against a wall, the Middle East is closer than ever to a disastrous conflagration.
Reasons can always be found to go to war. The roots of major conflicts often reach back decades – and this is true of the Israel-Iran vendetta, which dates to the 1979 Islamic revolution. The so-called “shadow war” between the two intensified in recent years. Yet all-out conflict had been avoided, until now. So who is principally to blame for this sudden, unprecedented explosion?
Answer: three angry old men whose behaviour raises serious doubts about their judgment, common sense, motives and even their sanity.
The fact that one of them – Benjamin Netanyahu, Israel’s prime minister – has actively sought a showdown with Iran for years does not mean it had to happen. The fact the Tehran regime is unusually vulnerable after Israel’s attacks last year and the defeat of its Hezbollah ally does not somehow legitimise a surprise assault on its sovereign soil. It’s true that UN nuclear inspectors say Iran is breaking treaty obligations. But that doesn’t amount to a green light for war.
Netanyahu, 75, is unfit to lead Israel, let alone make life-or-death decisions on its behalf. He failed to protect Israelis from the 2023 terror attacks, then dodged responsibility. He has failed to fulfil his vow to destroy Hamas and bring back the hostages, yet his soldiers have killed more than 55,000 Palestinians in Gaza in the process. He invaded Lebanon and Syria. Now it’s Iran. Where will he stop? Will he fight Turkey next? It’s not out of the question.
War is Netanyahu’s choice. It’s what gets him out of bed in the morning. It’s what keeps him and his UK-sanctioned far-right cronies in office and out of jail. His actions have inflicted extraordinary damage on his country’s reputation, fuelling antisemitism globally. He claims Israel is fighting for its existence – but his own political survival is a prime consideration, too. Netanyahu has been indicted for alleged war crimes in Gaza. He should be arrested, not defended and enabled, before any more crimes are committed.
Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, Iran’s bellicose supreme leader, is the second leading culprit. He should have been put out to grass in Qom years ago. The 86-year-old squats atop a repressive, corrupt theocratic regime that has lost touch with the society and people it ostensibly serves. Elections are fixed, judges are bent, media censorship is pervasive. The regime’s military incompetence, economic mismanagement and brutal persecution of young women, gay men and human rights defenders such as Nasrin Sotoudeh are notorious.
Like Netanyahu, Khamenei is backed by hardline conservatives and opposed by reformers, but it’s him who calls the shots. His suspicious insistence on stepping up uranium enrichment, even though civil applications are lacking, ultimately gave Netanyahu an opening. Although he is said to be unwell, Khamenei is a key reason why Iran will not abandon its nuclear programme. Even without him, Netanyahu’s idea that it can be totally eliminated is fantasy.
This blindspot may be the regime’s final undoing. Israel’s strikes have killed senior military leaders and damaged nuclear facilities and ballistic missile and drone forces. Khamenei himself, and Iran’s vital energy exports, may be next. In a patronising video, Netanyahu urged Iranians to rise up and seize their “freedom”. Many would like to. The difficulty with such advice, coming from a tainted source, is that it could have the opposite effect of rallying the public, and Arab leaders, around the regime.
Iran’s threats to attack US, British and French bases and ships if they help defend Israel, and to close the strait of Hormuz, heighten the risk of full-scale war and a global energy shock that could hurt the west and benefit Russia. These are some of the direct consequences of Donald Trump’s weak, vacillating stance.
Trump, 79, is the third man in this avoidable tragedy. He previously said he preferred to negotiate a new nuclear deal with Iran, having idiotically trashed the previous one. But he couldn’t decide on terms, and his amateurish negotiators kept changing their position. That was partly because Trump, as with Palestine and Ukraine, is too idle to study the details. He wings it instead, trusting to instincts that are invariably bad. That makes him easy prey for wily operators such as Netanyahu.
Trump’s feeble ineptitude meant that when Israel’s leader insisted last week that the time was right for an all-out attack on Iran, he folded. Typically, once the attack began, he switched, trying to claim credit and issuing flatulent threats of his own. Each time he opens his mouth, Trump inadvertently confirms Iran’s suspicions that the US and Israel are acting in close concert.
An urgent message for Keir Starmer: anyone who still thinks Trump has even the remotest idea what he’s doing when confronting the big international questions of the day should study the alarming events of the past week. Whether he is selling out to Vladimir Putin, weaponising tariffs, botching a Gaza ceasefire or bullying neighbours, Trump is a total menace. Far better, and safer, for Britain to bypass him and try as much as possible to act independently of the US from now on.
These angry old men could get us all killed.
Simon Tisdall is a Guardian foreign affairs commentator
Nadya Tolokonnikova, the co-founder of the feminist art collective Pussy Riot, was sitting in a replica Russian prison cell in downtown Los Angeles when the police started shutting down the streets around the art museum.
Police helicopters hovered overhead. Somewhere, through a loudspeaker, an officer delivered a tinny order to disperse.
Tolokonnikova was only three and a half days into what was supposed to be a “durational performance” reenacting her two years as a political prisoner in Vladimir Putin’s Russia.
But Donald Trump had ordered national guard troops into Los Angeles, over the objections of California’s governor, and the protests against immigration raids that Trump wanted to target were happening just a block from the gallery where Tolokonnikova was performing.
The Museum of Contemporary Art (Moca) hastily decided to shut its doors. But Tolokonnikova, 35, whose political art has left her as a wanted criminal in Russia, chose to continue her performance inside the empty museum.
“Police State Exhibit Closed Today Due to the Police State,” she posted on Instagram.
The situation “felt like I had entered a wormhole,” Tolokonnikova told the Guardian the next day via email. She wanted to be out on the streets, but she decided to finish her performance while live-streaming audio of the protests outside into her prison cell. It felt important, she wrote, “not to bend to the whims of Ice or the national guard”.
Tolokonnikova was in Los Angeles to display a new performance piece called Police State, which includes a replica Russian prison cell like the ones in which she was incarcerated for nearly two years, including in the notorious penal colony IK-14 in Mordovia. Tolokonnikova had been just 22 when she and two other members of Pussy Riot were convicted of “hooliganism motivated by religious hatred” for staging an anti-Putin “Punk Prayer” protest in a Moscow cathedral in early 2012.
After her release in late 2013, she kept demonstrating, and kept making art. In 2021, the Russian government labeled her a “foreign agent”. A recent multimedia performance, Putin’s Ashes, which came to Los Angeles in 2023, had landed her on Russia’s wanted list, and led to her being arrested in absentia for the crime of “insulting the religious feelings of believers”.
Los Angeles was the latest stop in a series of museum exhibitions that had brought the artist to Berlin and Linz in Austria for a show called Wanted. Police State, which was being performed at the Geffen Contemporary at Moca, had been designed for an audience, with museum visitors peering at her through observation holes in the walls, or following the surveillance video from her cell on gallery screens. It was her first time doing a “durational” performance, and she had planned to spend hours each day inside the cell creating music, mixing it with leaked audio from Russian prisons, and sewing protest slogans on military shirts, all the while surrounded by a crowd of supportive people outside the fake cell walls.
Now, suddenly, she was alone again. A block away, protesters had gathered outside the federal buildings where detained immigrants, including families with small children, were reportedly being held in basements, with little food or water.
In her replica cell, Tolokonnikova thought about the Los Angeles mothers and fathers who had just been torn away from their families, people who were “hard-working breadwinners and caretakers”, not violent gang members. She looked at the art decorating her cell’s walls, drawings sent by current and former political prisoners in Russia and Belarus, “people imprisoned for 10, 15, 20 years, simply for being good”.
“I was thinking of dehumanization and scapegoating as a universal mechanism – applied with heartbreaking ruthlessness both back home and here,” she wrote in the email. “I was thinking how the western idea that history inevitably moves toward progress is a mirage.”
When her performance hours were done, she walked out into the Los Angeles streets for comfort. It was early Sunday evening, and the protests downtown had been going on most of the afternoon. “People were giving out gas masks, water, and protective glasses,” she wrote. What captured her attention was not moments that would be played and replayed on the news, like Waymo automated vehicles set on fire, or protesters streaming on to the 101 highway. It was the way being at a protest feels: “That spirit of care and solidarity is precious,” she wrote. “People were being shot with rubber bullets and burned by tear gas, yet they refused to leave.”
On Wednesday, the museum announced that the rest of Tolokonnikova’s performance would have to be postponed indefinitely, because of “ongoing demonstrations and military activity”.
“Every single event I did in Russia was shut down by the cops,” she posted on Instagram, “and now it’s starting to feel a lot like Russia.”
Tolokonnikova, who faces immediate arrest if she returns to Russia, is not an optimist. In recent months, she has repeatedly compared her art practice to the musicians who kept playing on the Titanic as the ship went down.
“I think we live in a world that doesn’t really belong to us any more,” she told me in an interview the week before her Los Angeles performance began. “If 15 years ago, I wanted to radically change the world, now I just want to comfort people.”
“I mean, I still wouldn’t mind changing the world,” she added. But at the moment, the change she’s seeing “goes in the opposite direction”.
Still, Tolokonnikova, 35, does not take her ability to keep making big art installations for granted.
“It’s awesome,” she told me in our Los Angeles interview, as she and her collaborators were working on the final touches to her replica prison cell. “I don’t know if victory is the right word, but it’s rewarding.”
When I walked inside the replica cell, it was bigger and far more detailed than I expected, with battered, blue-painted plaster walls etched with graffiti, a desk for Tolokonnikova’s music equipment, and a toilet in the corner that she planned to use during her performance shifts, which would last either six or eight hours. The floor of the cell was dirty, and the observation holes fit into the walls had heavy metal covers that could slide open or closed. There were surveillance cameras all over the cell, even one pointed at the toilet.
The Russian prisons where she was incarcerated had “cameras right above the toilet bowl, which makes no sense for us people who live outside of jails”, she said. “But once you’re in, you kind of just know, well, that’s what it is.”
We talked with the noise of construction around us, and the sharp smell of iron in the air, a sign of the metalwork in progress nearby. Partway through our conversation, the metalworker approached, wheeling the massive cell door, to ask Tolokonnikova about the finish she wanted on the metal.
Each of these details mattered to Tolokonnikova. One of her inspirations for the durational prison performance is her friend Marina Abramović, known as “the grandmother of performance art”. Another is the late conceptual artist Ilya Kabakov, who had meticulously replicated an old, deteriorating Soviet public bathroom and displayed it in a European gallery so western audiences could understand the context of his art. “It’s one of the works that changed my life for ever,” she said.
For authenticity, the table in her cell was covered with a garish plastic tablecloth printed with lemons, a “very post-Soviet thing” that people incarcerated in Russia use “to recreate this idea of comfort of coziness, in jail”.
To more directly connect her performance to other political prisoners still incarcerated in Russia, Tolokonnikova had collected drawings they had made to display in the cell, including a depiction of a candle by Russian anti-Ukraine war activist Andrey Boyarshinov. This was a laborious process, she explained, working with the prisoners’ family members and lawyers, and some of the art had not yet arrived. But she was hopeful that displaying Russian prisoners’ work in a prestigious American museum might help their cases, even help them get on a prisoner exchange list.
Tolokonnikova and another jailed member of Pussy Riot, Maria Alyokhina, staged hunger strikes and drew international attention to the conditions in their different prisons.
When she was incarcerated in prison colony No 14 in the Russian region of Mordovia, Tolokonnikova was forced to work 16-hour days, seven days a week, sewing uniforms for police officers. The sewing machine she had used in prison had constantly broken down, something she believes was not a coincidence: the prison staff wanted to make her life “completely impossible”.
A decade later, in her re-enactment of prison life, Tolokonnikova was planning to again sew military-style uniforms on a battered old sewing machine, but this time she would be embellishing them with “some simple words that mean something to me like exiled or voided, cancelled, expelled, alien – how I feel these days’”. She would trim some of the uniforms with lace, she added, “because I always like to add some cuteness”.
The lives of Russian dissidents are not easy, and becoming a prominent Putin critic, as Tolokonnikova has done, is dangerous, even after dissidents have left Russia. One of the art works in Tolokonnikova’s Los Angeles exhibit is a candy machine labeled with the different poisons that have been used to murder enemies of the Russian state: Polonium 210 Isotope, Thallium, Sarin.
On certain subjects, Tolokonnikovia can be laconic, even dismissive. Asked about how she was preparing to protect her mental health while reenacting her imprisonment in Los Angeles, she said she had not really made any plans. “Self-care is not my strong suit. I’m just like: I don’t have time for this.”
When it came to performance, she said, Ambramović had told her several years ago that “once you commit to an idea, it basically negates all the fear” and that “if you believe that the particular artistic idea that you chose is good enough, then you just kind of don’t care about physical safety, or emotional safety”.
“I’m sure it’s gonna be triggering as fuck at some points for me to sit there,” she added. “But do I care? No. Because I think the work has to be done, and I’ll deal with it later.”
Tolokonnikova’s punk aesthetic is not something she adopts for performances. She told me cheerfully about almost getting blown up by pyrotechnics at a recent unauthorized concert, and praised the work of LA’s Dead City Punx, a hardcore punk band and one of her planned collaborators in Los Angeles.
“One thing that I just don’t vibe with in modern American society – there’s an entire thing about safety. And I’ve lived my life in a way that safety was the last thing that I would care about,” she said. “This is a thing I think about a lot lately. We need to be less safe, be ready to offend ourselves and other people. Otherwise, Maga people are just going to keep winning, because they’re not afraid.”
Tolokonnikova told me she had hoped that people would come to her Moca exhibit with their children. “I’ve always been obsessed with building a version of Disneyland, but much more radical and grim,” she said. She had worked with Banksy on Dismaland, the artist’s 2015 dark Disney satire, but she’s still thinking about the possibilities of a more revolutionary theme park.
“It’s just a giant waste of time and money the way that Disneyland looks now. It just doesn’t accomplish anything,” she said. Imagine, she suggested, if the animatronic characters of the Pirates of the Caribbean ride were instead a way for kids “to learn the history of the feminist movement”.
“So instead of pirates doing this,” she said, jerking her arms, “it could be like, you’re a suffragette being arrested.”
“Obviously, I don’t have a budget to build Disneyland,” she added. “But it was a dream of mine for ever.”
Police State had been scheduled to run through 14 June, with a final performance by Pussy Riot Siberia, Tolokonnikova’s new performance collective, to close it out. Now, it is postponed to an unknown date in the future.
“I guess the National Guard will be performing POLICE STATE instead of me this week,” Tolokonnikova wrote on Instagram.
 This article was amended on 16 June 2025 to correct Nadya Tolokonnikova’s surname on two mentions; it is Tolokonnikova, not Tolokonnika. Police State’s show date was also corrected; it is scheduled to run through 14 June, not the 13th as previously stated.
Senior BBC figures are examining plans that would lead to American consumers paying to access its journalism, as the broadcaster looks to the US to boost its fragile finances.
The corporation, which is facing fierce competition from streamers and falling licence fee income, has been targeting US audiences as it attempts to increase its commercial revenues outside the UK.
Executives believe the perceived polarisation of the US media, especially during Donald Trump’s second term, may have created an opportunity for the BBC’s brand of impartial coverage.
The US is considered to be a prime target for the BBC to increase its overseas income, which has become an urgent task as the value of the licence fee has fallen significantly in real terms since 2010. Last year, the number of people paying the licence fee fell by half a million as audiences were drawn to alternatives such as Netflix and YouTube. The licence fee is £174.50 a year.
While the corporation has already relaunched its website and news app in the US, American consumers of its content are not asked to make any kind of financial contribution to the BBC’s output.
The Guardian understands that senior figures are keen to increase revenues coming from the US, including examining the idea of asking users to pay for access in some form. Some US broadcasters, such as the free-to-air TV network Public Broadcasting Service (PBS), already ask for donations from supporters.
It is one of the potential areas of reform being considered by BBC bosses as talks over the renewal of its royal charter begin in earnest. The charter expires in 2027, with the corporation’s leadership adamant that their red lines are any move to a subscription or advertising model in the UK. However, they are also under pressure to show they are attempting to increase all other areas of income.
Tim Davie, the BBC’s director general, is keen to increase the corporation’s non-licence fee income. He is the former boss of BBC Studios, which oversees the broadcaster’s commercial operations. He has said he is willing to embrace reforms that make its finances “fairer, more modern and more sustainable”.
BBC Studios has already been selling ads on its content in the US, including the BBC.com website and app. The corporation’s website in the US was relaunched at the end of 2023, followed by an overhaul of the corporation’s app last year.
The US is the BBC’s largest English-speaking market and its second-largest overall, behind India. Its focus on North America has led to its digital newsroom there doubling in size, with an expansion in live broadcast programming from its Washington DC bureau.
Internal figures suggest since relaunching, BBC.com has had double-digit growth for nine consecutive months. The website reaches 130 million people globally, with 67 million of those in North America.
Despite the focus on increasing its income, the BBC’s revenues fell by 12% last year to £1.84bn, though it has increased significantly over the last five years. The fall last year was blamed on a slump in a post-Covid pandemic fall in TV production and commissioning, as well as investments made in BBC.com.
Deep within the glittering bowels of Stockholm’s fanciest hotel, grave ruminations on the future of the world are taking place.
A heady throng of tech billionaires, ministers, corporate titans and the king of the Netherlands have convened in Sweden for the 71st Bilderberg meeting – the publicity-shy annual policy conference that has long sustained conspiracy theorists – hosted this year by the fabulously wealthy Wallenberg family.
The four days of transatlantic talks are taking place at the swanky Grand hotel, which is owned, like so much else in Sweden, by the Wallenbergs. The Swedish PM, Ulf Kristersson, turned up for welcome dinner on Thursday evening, and would have been about halfway through his second plate of meatballs when the first of Israel’s rockets dropped on Tehran.
What better time for the prospects of world war three to go up a gear than in the middle of a Bilderberg conflab, with nuclear proliferation slated for discussion, and the heads of Nato and MI6, and two of America’s most senior military officers in the room. They’re joined in Stockholm by the CEOs of several major defence suppliers such as Palantir, Thales and Anduril. Even the quietly spoken host of the conference, Marcus Wallenberg, happens to run an arms company. He’s chair of Sweden’s largest defence contractor, Saab.
The Tehran attacks slot happily into the conference agenda, which includes the topics “Middle East” and the rise of an “authoritarian axis” – what Bilderberg insider Nadia Schadlow, a former deputy US national security adviser, describes as “the growing collusion among revisionist powers”.
According to Schadlow: “An authoritarian axis is rapidly coalescing around China, Russia, Iran, and North Korea, disrupting the belief that an international community has taken shape in the aftermath of the cold war.”
Earlier this year, the Economist magazine, whose editor sits alongside Schadlow on Bilderberg’s steering committee, struck a similar note, declaring: “The rupture of the post-1945 order is gaining pace.” But the Economist handed Donald Trump a fair chunk of the blame for “junking the transatlantic alliance”.
What this means for Bilderberg is that seven decades of hard work nurturing the postwar international order are in danger of going up in – literal – smoke.
Trump’s vice-president, JD Vance, has taken every opportunity to lever the US and Europe apart. “Europe being more independent”, he said recently, “is good for the United States.” Back last summer, before the election, he said: “The United States has to focus more on east Asia. That is going to be the future of US foreign policy for the next 40 years, and Europe has to wake up to that fact.” The presence in Stockholm of Samuel Paparo, the head of the US Indo-Pacific Command, is a sign that Bilderberg has taken this to heart. Also, there’s another member of the “authoritarian axis” which looms far larger than Iran over this conference: China.
Though the name “China” doesn’t actually appear on this year’s agenda, the heightening struggle between America and China is a spectre which haunts at least half of the topics being discussed – from the “geopolitics of energy and critical minerals” to “defence innovation and resilience”.
Just a couple of months ago, Eric Schmidt, the former Google boss and longtime Bilderberg board member, warned that “China is at parity or pulling ahead of the United States in a variety of technologies, notably at the AI frontier”. Schmidt suspects that it will be only a matter of “three to five years” before some form of super-intelligent AI is achieved.
“The geopolitical stakes, especially in the race with China, are enormous,” he says, because attaining super-intelligent AI would mean total and unassailable military domination. In short, it would give the winner “the keys to control the entire world”.
But here’s the problem – “due to the immense power requirements of large-scale AI”, beating China to the super-intelligent punch would require “potentially 100 times more energy” than is currently available.
The head of the International Energy Agency, Fatih Birol, who is conferencing this year at Bilderberg, recently posted on X that “global electricity demand from data centres powering AI is set to soar in the next decade”.
In this desperate winner-takes-all race for the keys to the world, in which the “geopolitics of energy” becomes ever more important, power stations – along with the data centers they feed – are going to become the No 1 military targets.
Cue the AI drones.
For the time being, before AI invents completely new and unimagined ways for us all to kill each other, drones are perhaps the biggest practical application of AI in warfare. There’s a healthy swarm of drone manufacturers at this year’s Stockholm summit, sharing their hopes and fears about “defence innovation”.
Hovering alongside Eric Schmidt there’s the chairman of Thales – “a leader in the fast growing market of unmanned aircraft systems”. Buzzing nearby is Gundbert Scherf, co-founder of German drone and AI company Helsing. One of the early investors in Helsing is also present: the CEO of Spotify, Daniel Ek, which presumably means that the Helsing drones will have the best playlists, booming out suggested songs as they swoop down to attack.
The investment interlinking of Bilderberg participants is particularly intense around autonomous drone tech. Saab is an investor in Helsing. Helsing is collaborating with leading AI company Mistral, whose CEO is attending the conference. Mistral was funded by Schmidt, who’s a huge fan of military UAVs.
Schmidt’s recent AI/drone expo, which took place last month in Washington, was co-sponsored by Palantir, which was set up by Bilderberg insider Peter Thiel, who is a major funder of Anduril, whose CEO, Brian Schimpf, is also in Stockholm. Schimpf is a former employee of Palantir, whose CEO, Alex Karp, is also on board of Bilderberg, having been ushered on to it by Thiel. And so it goes.
Thiel’s fingers can be found wriggling around in an awful lot of pies, not least the juiciest pie of all: the White House. The two senior White House officials at the Stockholm conference, Kevin Harrington and Michael Kratsios, both used to work for Thiel Capital. And Thiel’s famously long list of influential acolytes includes none other than Vance.
Only a few days ago, Vance was on a podcast defending Trump’s proposed Palantir-powered database on every citizen, which was described by MSNBC as “an unprecedented spy machine that could track Americans”. Vance waved away any such concerns: “I don’t believe that Palantir is collecting any information.”
Thank heavens for everyone’s freedoms, Palantir is run by self-confessed “classic liberal” Alex Karp. In a recent earnings call, the idiosyncratic CEO said his company was busy “building really great things”, in order “to power the west to its obvious innate superiority”.
Karp throbs with what he calls “productive narcissism” – at Palantir, he insists: “We’re proud of our moral stance”. His philosophy, as he sums it up, is this: “If you’ve done something big and important, you’re probably a good person.” Palantir is successful, ipso facto, it’s doing good.
As the Economist put it: “Fast approaching is a might-is-right world.” It’s a kind of Gordon Gekko morality that would be heartily approved of by Wall Street legend and Bilderberg faithful Henry Kravis of KKR, on whom Gekko was actually based.
Of course, not all the tech luminaries at this year’s Bilderberg are thinking in terms of world domination.
Demis Hassabis, the co-founder of DeepMind, turned up in Stockholm with the 2024 Nobel prize for Chemistry in his back pocket and some rather more optimistic rhetoric about AI, which he thinks will usher in an era of “radical abundance”. He thinks of AI as “the cavalry” arriving to save us from ourselves.
He says: “I’d be very worried about society today if I didn’t know that something as transformative as AI was coming down the line.”
And Jack Clark, the co-founder of Anthropic, likes to think AI replacing us in every last occupation will help us find new ways of living fulfilling lives. His vision is of a world in which, freed up from our jobs, we’ll engage in “creative, fun exercises in getting AIs to build things, or make things, or carry out competitions and games where people can play them with one another”.
Pulling back for a moment from the AI endgame to the world in 2025, there’s one rather less jazzy item on the conference agenda worth mentioning – “US economy”.
But even this has everything to do with China. Taking part in the Stockholm summit is Republican congressman Jason Smith, a vocal fan of Trump’s “America first” trade policy. Smith has pledged to “continue fighting to combat the economic and national security threat China poses to our great nation”. He’s fully aligned with fellow conference goer Robert Lighthizer, an influential economic adviser close to Trump, who told CBS News earlier this year that “China to me is an existential threat to the United States”.
Lighthizer is urging a “strategic decoupling” from Chinese trade, and most importantly, he says: “We should disentangle our technology.”
Here’s where Trump’s trade vision intersects with not just the long view of Silicon Valley’s bullish billionaires, but with the longstanding transatlantic vision of Bilderberg. Thiel recently called for “a very drastic reset with China” and urged other nations to do likewise.And this reset, he thinks, can become “the basis of how we build a stronger western alliance of the free world”.
In other words, look at our success, and join us. Of course, the only thing wrong with this self-fulfilling meritocratic version of western civilization is that if the Chinese succeed in beating the west to the keys of the world, it will mean that they were the good guys after all.
Campaigners in at least a dozen tourist hotspots across southern Europe have taken to the streets to protest against “touristification”.
It is the most widespread joint action to date against what they see as the steady reshaping of their cities to meet the needs of tourists rather than people who live and work there.
Thousands turned out at marches in cities including Barcelona and Palma de Mallorca on Sunday, while others staged more symbolic actions. In the Italian port of Genoa, campaigners dragged a cardboard cruise ship through the old town’s narrow alleyways to show that tourism does not fit in the city.
A procession later on Sunday in Lisbon was due to involve a replica of St Anthony being “evicted” from his church and carried to the site of a prospective luxury hotel, to stress that even saints suffer from touristification.
In Barcelona, an estimated 600-800 demonstrators marched through the city centre chanting “Your holidays, my misery” and waving banners with slogans such as “Mass tourism kills the city” and “Their greed brings us ruin.”
Some fired water pistols, set off coloured flares and put “Neighbourhood self-defence, tourist go home” stickers on shop windows and hotels. Barcelona, a city of 1.6 million, drew 26 million tourists last year.
Threading through all the actions was a rallying cry for a rethink of a tourism model that campaigners say has increasingly funnelled profits into the hands of a few, while leaving locals to pay the price through soaring house prices and rents, environmental degradation and the proliferation of precarious, low-paying jobs.
The tensions around tourism burst into public view last year after tens of thousands of people protested in Spain’s most popular destinations. The bulk of Sunday’s protests took place in Spain, where tourist arrivals surged last year to record levels. Cities in Italy and Portugal also took part.
Despite the spate of fear-inducing headlines in some media, the aim was not to attack tourists, said Asier Basurto, a member of the “tourism degrowth” platform that organised a march in the Basque city of San Sebastián.
“People who go on vacation to one place or another are not our enemies, nor are they the target of our actions,” he said. “Let me be clear: our enemies are those who speculate on housing, who exploit workers and those who are profiting handsomely from the touristification of our cities.”
The seeds for the joint day of action were sown in April after groups from Spain, Italy, Portugal and France gathered in Barcelona for a days-long conference under the umbrella of the Southern European Network Against Touristification.
“When we started speaking to each other, it was amazing,” said María Cardona, of Canviem el Rumb, or Let’s Change Course, one of the groups behind Sunday’s march in Ibiza. “Despite the distance between us, we’re all grappling with a similar problem.”
In Ibiza, the march’s slogan was “the right to a dignified life”, said Cardona. “What does that mean when it comes to life on the island? There’s the right to water – we’re under restrictions, there’s a drought, they’ve cut off all the public fountains,” she added. “But villas, hotels and luxury homes continue to fill their pools as if there were no water restrictions.”
There was also the soaring cost of living that had left many workers living in vans, caravans or tents. “And another thing we’re seeing is that the traditional, historical names of places are being changed to English names that locals don’t know,” said Cardona. “It’s like the island’s DNA is being transformed.”
In Venice, locals protested against the lack of regulations that has allowed the number of short-term rentals to surge and hotels to tighten their grip on the housing market. “We’ve been emphasising for a couple of years now that there are more tourist beds than registered residents,” said Remi Wacogne of Ocio, a civic observatory on housing. “Tourism is physically and practically taking over homes.”
The steady shift had unleashed a wave of change in the city. “One of the main businesses that keeps opening up in Venice, in addition to bars and restaurants, is ATMs,” said Wacogne. “Which is also in a sense a metaphor of what is going on. So Venice is basically an ATM for a very restricted group of people, firms and investors who are allowed to make money just out of renting the place out to people.”
Sign up to Headlines Europe
A digest of the morning's main headlines from the Europe edition emailed direct to you every week day
after newsletter promotion
The sentiment was echoed in Genoa, where residents organised a “noisy stroll” with their cardboard cruise ship to highlight the incongruence of tourism and local life. “We see tourism as a means to extract value from our cities and regions,” said one organiser, who asked not to be named. “We are not some sort of mine. This is a place where people live.”
Underpinning the joint action was a semantic shift. Rather than overtourism, which suggests that the solution lies in rolling back the number of tourists, the focus was on touristification, highlighting how hotspots are increasingly becoming commodified to be consumed by visitors, said Manuel Martin, of the Movement for a Housing Referendum, one of the groups organising the Lisbon action.
“So it’s a shift away from being a place that exists by and for the people that live and work there,” he added.
This has chipped away at the culture and social fabric of cities, added Martin, pointing to the shops and bookshops in Lisbon, some of them more than a century old, that have closed their doors after being priced out by rising rents. “It sort of excavates meaning from a place and turns it into a Disneyfied version of what it really is.”
After a handful of protesters bearing water guns squirted water at tourists last year in Barcelona, making headlines around the world, organisers in the city said they were encouraging people to bring water guns to Sunday’s march.
“But this needs to be contextualised,” said Daniel Pardo Rivacoba, of the Neighbourhood Assembly for Tourism Degrowth. Last year’s incident was covered by tabloids and other media as though it was threatening or intimidating. “The most extreme ones spoke about violence and things like that,” he said. “But a water gun is not a gun. It’s a toy. It doesn’t hurt anyone.”
Campaigners in the city have adopted the water pistol as a symbol of local resistance. “To us, it is clear that it doesn’t harm anyone,” Pardo Rivacoba said. “But if we’re talking about violence, let’s talk about the violence of touristification. Let’s talk about the violence that tourism is inflicting on the city in terms of evictions, of pushing out the population, of labour exploitation, in the overload and abuse of public services.
“When it comes to tourism, there is violence taking place. But it’s not because of water guns.”
Additional reporting by Jon Henley
At least eight Palestinians were killed and dozens more wounded on Sunday in shooting near food distribution points in Gaza, as residents described an escalation of Israeli attacks happening against the backdrop of the new war with Iran.
Although Israel has said Gaza is a secondary theatre of operations to Iran, Palestinians reported continuing serious violence including fire around US- and Israel-supported aid distributions points and there are fears that global attention is moving on from Gaza.
“There were wounded, dead, and martyrs,” Ahmed al-Masri told the Associated Press on Sunday as he returned empty-handed from one of the sites. “It’s a trap.”
Umm Hosni al-Najjar said she joined the crowd heading to the aid point in Rafah’s Tal al-Sultan neighbourhood at about 4.30am. She said the shooting began as people were advancing to the site a few minutes after her arrival.
The latest killings of Palestinians near the aid distributions managed by the Gaza Humanitarian Foundation (GHF) took place as Tom Fletcher, the UN’s under-secretary general for humanitarian affairs and emergency relief coordinator, warned about the foundation’s operations.
He said: “Hunger must never be met with bullets. Humanitarians must be allowed to do their work. Life-saving aid must reach people in need, in line with humanitarian principles.”
“Without immediate and massively scaled-up access to the basic means survival, we risk a descent into famine, further chaos and the loss of more lives,” he said.
There have been near-daily shootings near the sites since they opened last month. Witnesses say Israeli forces have fired repeatedly on the crowds and health officials say scores of people have been killed. The military has acknowledged firing warning shots at what it says were suspects approaching its forces.
In the latest incident, Palestinians said Israeli forces opened fire at about dawn towards crowds of Palestinians heading to two aid sites in Rafah.
The attacks in Gaza are taking place as concern mounts that the territory is being forgotten.
Thirty-two-year-old Mahmoud Abu Haloub, who has been displaced six times during the war, told the Guardian that the situation in Gaza had worsened since the outbreak of hostilities with Iran last week.
He said: “The number of aid trucks has decreased, and there is now greater danger for those who go to receive aid. The Israeli army has become more deadly than before, launching shells and bombs that kill many, without anyone talking about these massacres.”
Mohammed Zuhair, from the Beit Lahiya area, said: “The world’s shift of attention toward what is happening with Iran is a disaster for the people of Gaza, especially amid the current famine.
“The focus on the Palestinian cause has diminished, and the world has forgotten about us. Our issue has been pushed to the margins while we live through a suffocating crisis under Israeli aggression, blockade, and a lack of food and medicine.”
Maryam Al-Shafie, a 65-year-old widow and mother of a family of 12, said: “Yesterday, my grandson went to the aid trucks but came back with nothing. It was his first time, and we won’t let him go again after the massacre took place, and many were killed.
“Since the events between Iran and Israel began, it has been a catastrophe for us. The situation has become even more unbearable. We expected the pressure on Gaza to ease, but it only worsened. No one talks about it – all the news is about what’s happening in Iran.”
Experts and aid workers say Israel’s blockade and military campaign have caused widespread hunger and raised the risk of famine.
The shooting happened hundreds of metres away from the sites, which are operated by the GHF, a group that Israel and the US hope will replace the UN-run system of aid distribution.
The UN has rejected the new system, saying it violates humanitarian principles.
The aid system rolled out last month has been marred by chaos and violence, while the UN system has struggled to deliver food because of Israeli restrictions and a breakdown of law and order, despite Israel loosening a total blockade it imposed from early March to mid-May.
The GHF said there had been no violence in or around the distribution points. It has warned people to stay on the designated routes and recently paused delivery to discuss safety measures with the military.
Israel’s military campaign has killed more than 55,000 Palestinians, according to Gaza’s health ministry.
The day Ranjit’s daughter was born, he distributed sweets to the entire village – not just because he was thrilled to be a father for the first time, but because he was father to a girl. “God heard my heart and granted my wish,” he says. His devotion to baby Kiran* was immediate and unshakeable. He would rush home from his work in the fields to spend time caring for her.
Millions of fathers around the world will relate to the joy Ranjit felt, but in deeply patriarchal rural India publicly celebrating the arrival of a girl is an unusual, even defiant, act.
Ranjit’s love for and faith in Kiran is captured in the film To Kill A Tiger, which follows the poor rice farmer as he pursues justice for his daughter after she was gang-raped aged 13. Kiran is determined to see her attackers in court and Ranjit is determined to support her.
Quietly but doggedly, he refuses to give up even in the face of threats and ostracism from his community. He credits Kiran and his wife, Jaganti, for giving him the strength to keep going.
After a screening of the film this year in New York, Ranjit and Kiran were joined by another supporter of an extraordinary daughter: Ziauddin Yousafzai, better known as Malala’s father. The screening was used to launch #StandWithHer, a global gender-justice campaign to support survivors of sexual violence.
At the time, Yousafzai spoke of Ranjit as “a man all men should be proud of – the father all fathers should look up to”.
On Sunday, a short film is being released of the two men in conversation, discussing fatherhood, courage and their commitment to seeing their daughters become independent young women despite the social and political barriers they face.
Nisha Pahuja, To Kill A Tiger’s director and founder of #StandWithHer, says the film marks the start of a wider drive to invite men and boys to discuss the ways patriarchy limits both sexes.
“Power comes at a cost – not just to women and girls, but also, to men and boys,” says Pahuja. “There is of course no denying the obvious, material benefits of this power imbalance or the violence it has permitted, but there’s also no denying the suffering of men and boys.
“It’s so clear today that men and boys are struggling to define themselves. I do feel Zia and Ranjit are powerful, unapologetic role models here.”
Yousafzai describes how Malala was named after a 19th-century Afghan heroine “because there was power in this name”. He says he knew it would suit her. “In my mind, I associated a girl with strength, and I thought if I had a daughter she will be strong; she will have her own voice and she will be known by her name.”
Yousafzai was adamant his daughter would be educated – something his own mother and five sisters had been denied. “Education was the front door and it had to stay open,” he tells Ranjit.
He recalls how he used to invite Malala to join discussions and debates with friends at home because he recognised that she had a great mind and always had something to contribute. Malala, he says, was not just a daughter but a “comrade and a friend”, so when, in 2012, she was shot in the head by the Taliban for standing up for her right to go to school, losing her was unthinkable.
When she survived the attack and became a global advocate for education, Yousafzai campaigned alongside her. They are “one soul in two bodies”, he says. His nickname for her, Jaani, means soulmate.
After Kiran was assaulted, Ranjit was expected to marry her off to one of her attackers – a common response to sexual violence that insists women and girls can only rid themselves of shame by becoming wives. Ranjit and Kiran refused to accept that shame and instead placed it squarely on the perpetrators. “A real, caring father puts his daughter first,” he says.
Yousafzai says he sees Malala in Kiran. “It is as if Malala appears in front of me. Her voice will be a step against extremism, a step against violence; it already is.”
The campaign, he adds, will spread the message that men should be allies, using their privilege to challenge long-held beliefs. “Every father, every brother: all men must stand with women.”
Resistance and change start at home, he says. “This institution of the family is an agent of change, an informal one … there’s no force more powerful than the family.”
Ranjit agrees. “We can convince men; it needs to enter their minds. As more and more people come together, I feel it will definitely have an impact on men and boys.”
* Kiran is a pseudonym
Like her political contemporary Corazon Aquino in the Philippines, Violeta Chamorro, who has died aged 95, was thrust into the limelight in Nicaragua – and ultimately, in 1990, to the presidency – because a dictator murdered her husband.
He was Pedro Joaquín Chamorro, publisher of the family newspaper La Prensa, and for many years a serious irritant to the Somoza dictatorship that ruled in Nicaragua from 1936. After the assassination of Anastasio Somoza García in 1956, Pedro Joaquín was arrested on charges of rebellion and sent into internal exile.
Never one for quiet acceptance of his fate, he escaped with Violeta to neighbouring Costa Rica. From there he organised a rebel force that in 1959 attempted to overthrow Anastasio’s son Luis, who had succeeded as president. The attempt failed, and Pedro Joaquín was sentenced to a nine-year jail term. On his release, he went back to editing La Prensa. By the late 1960s, Anastasio Jr (also known as Tachito) had taken over from his brother Luis, but the situation in Nicaragua had deteriorated still further.
In 1975, Tachito suspended civil rights. Pedro Joaquín not only campaigned against him through La Prensa, but he also took on a political role as head of the Democratic Liberation Union (Udel). Tachito had had enough. In January 1978, he sent his gunmen to machine-gun Pedro Joaquín to death on his way to work.
The murder provoked a national uprising which led, the following year, to the overthrow by the Sandinista National Liberation Front (FSLN) of the 40-year-old dictatorship. As Pedro Joaquín’s widow, Violeta Chamorro took over the newspaper. With it, she inherited an uncomfortable role as one of the principal leaders of the visible opposition.
When the Sandinistas swept to power in July 1979, she became a member of the first, five-member transitional junta that controlled Nicaragua until the election of Daniel Ortega as president in 1984. But her conservative politics soon caused a split with the predominantly Marxist FSLN. Once more she was in opposition.
As the rebellion mounted by the US-backed contra rebels grew stronger, the Sandinista government grew correspondingly less tolerant. La Prensa, accused of receiving CIA funds to destabilise the government, was again subjected to censorship. For a year it was closed down altogether.
Like many Nicaraguan families, the Chamorros themselves were deeply divided. Of Violeta’s four children, two were pro-Sandinista and two anti. Carlos Fernando edited the FSLN daily Barricada, and his sister Claudia was a Sandinista diplomat. Cristiana remained at La Prensa, while Pedro Joaquín Jr became a member of the contra leadership. The country’s other main paper, the independent but pro-government Nuevo Diario, was edited by their uncle, Xavier.
In the 1990 general election, held against a background of war, the FSLN faced a heterogeneous coalition of anti-Sandinista forces, ranging from communists to the far right. Known as the UNO, this shaky front needed a candidate capable of ousting Ortega — and the only viable option was Violeta Chamorro, who had little genuine political experience.
One of the seven children of Amalia Torres and Carlos Barrios Sacasa, she was born into a well-to-do farming family in the southern town of Rivas. Sent as a teenager to a Catholic girls’ school in the US before her marriage in 1950 to Pedro Joaquín Chamorro, she had acquired a knowledge of English and a certain grasp of world affairs. But perhaps her principal asset at the time of the 1990 election – leaving aside support from Washington – was her grandmotherly demeanour and apparent absence of guile.
Much to the astonishment of most observers — not least the Sandinistas themselves – she beat Ortega handsomely and became the first elected female president in Latin American history.
It was an unenviable job. More than a decade of war, coming on top of dictatorship, had wrecked what little infrastructure existed and reduced living standards in Nicaragua to the levels of the 30s. Forty per cent of the workforce was unemployed and there was a huge foreign debt. Inflation stood at more than 13,000%.
Chamorro faced a hostile, mainly pro-FSLN, union movement, which staged a series of strikes, and a huge contra force, sceptical of her intentions. The Sandinista leaders used the transition period to transfer large amounts of state property into their own, private hands. Nonetheless, the new president could not govern without them. She agreed to leave Ortega’s brother Humberto in charge of the army, provoking a split in the UNO coalition from which it did not recover.
Throughout her seven-year term she was in effect obliged to rule in alliance with the FSLN, under the guidance of her politically savvy son-in-law, Antonio Lacayo – a de facto prime minister. Within months, she succeeded in persuading most of the contras to demobilise, in exchange for an offer of land. Ending the war, and beginning the process of national reconciliation, was probably her most lasting achievement.
On the economic front she was not so successful. Her policies were based on the revival of the prostrate private sector and on a public sector reform programme that followed the standard, free-market, International Monetary Fund recipe. Burdened by debt and underdevelopment, plagued by natural disasters that included both drought and floods, Nicaragua stubbornly refused to advance, and by the end of Chamorro’s term it seemed just as firmly stuck at the bottom of the Latin American pile.
In January 1997, Chamorro handed the presidency to Arnoldo Alemán. It was only the second time in the country’s history that one elected president had been succeeded by another. The celebration, however, was short-lived: within a few years Alemán was facing corruption charges, and in 2007 Ortega returned to office, and imposed a harsh crackdown on any opposition.
Chamorro herself retired from active politics, though her family remained involved in public life. Since 2023 she had been receiving medical care in Costa Rica.
She is survived by her children, and 12 grandchildren.
 Violeta Barrios de Chamorro, politician and newspaper proprietor, born 18 October 1929; died 14 June 2025
China is considering lifting the sanctions it imposed on UK parliamentarians in 2021 in the latest sign of warming relations between London and Beijing.
The Chinese government is reviewing the sanctions, which it introduced four years ago, in response to what it called “lies and disinformation” about human rights abuses in Xinjiang, according to two UK government sources familiar with the conversations.
Asked to comment, a spokesperson for the Chinese embassy in London said: “China has always attached importance to developing relations with the UK. Currently, UK-China relations are showing a positive momentum.”
“Exchanges and dialogues between the UK and China at all levels and in all fields will help enhance mutual understanding and trust between the two sides, and will also help promote the continuous development of bilateral relations and practical cooperation, which benefit the two peoples.”
The development took place after a week in which several high-ranking Chinese officials visited the UK and held talks with senior government figures.
He Lifeng, China’s vice-premier, and Wang Wentao, its commerce minister, were in London for trade talks with the US last week. He met Rachel Reeves, the UK chancellor, while Wang held talks with Jonathan Reynolds, the business and trade secretary.
Liu Jianchao, one of China’s top diplomats who heads the international department of the Chinese Communist party, paid a three-day visit to the UK early last week where he met David Lammy, the foreign secretary, and Jonathan Powell, the national security adviser. None of these meetings were publicised by the UK government.
Liu also participated in an event with British MPs hosted by the Great Britain China Centre, an arm’s-length government body, where China’s sanctions on UK parliamentarians were raised repeatedly. The visit faced criticism because Liu is an architect of China’s campaign of repression against its citizens overseas.
It is unknown whether China is considering lifting all the sanctions it imposed on UK citizens and organisations four years ago, or only some. Nine UK citizens were banned from China in 2021, including five Conservative MPs and two members of the House of Lords. They were targeted for highlighting human rights violations against the Muslim Uyghur community in the north-western province of Xinjiang.
China’s sanctions were a retaliation against the UK imposing sanctions on Chinese officials held responsible for atrocities in Xinjiang. UK officials said there was no prospect of the government lifting those.
The five MPs put under sanctions in 2021 were the former Tory leader Iain Duncan Smith, Tom Tugendhat, Nusrat Ghani, Neil O’Brien and Tim Loughton, who stood down last summer. The two peers were David Alton, a crossbencher, and Helena Kennedy from Labour. Several are members of the Inter-Parliamentary Alliance on China.
The Newcastle University academic Jo Smith Finley, whose research focuses on the Uyghurs, and Geoffrey Nice KC, who chaired the Uyghur tribunal that investigated atrocities against the minority group, also had sanctions imposed upon them.
Those under sanctions are banned from entering China, Hong Kong and Macau, any property they have in China has been frozen and Chinese citizens and institutions are prohibited from doing business with them.
Sign up to First Edition
Our morning email breaks down the key stories of the day, telling you what’s happening and why it matters
after newsletter promotion
In April, China lifted its sanctions on five MEPs and on the European parliament’s subcommittee on human rights, which were also imposed in 2021 in response to the EU’s own sanctions. The move was part of Beijing’s charm offensive to improve ties and revive talks over a trade deal with Brussels, amid the turmoil caused by Donald Trump’s tariffs.
There is no prospect of a UK-China trade deal. However, Beijing is awaiting a government decision over the fate of its proposal to build a controversial super-embassy near the Tower of London. Ministers are due to approve or reject the plan this summer. The US government has reportedly raised concerns about the security implications.
UK officials are drawing up plans for Reynolds to visit Beijing to revive a key trade dialogue with China later this year, and for Keir Starmer to make a bilateral trip to the country, potentially in the autumn.
Labour took a much stronger stance towards human rights abuses in Xinjiang in opposition, when it pledged to take action to recognise them as genocide. It has softened its position in government and sought to build closer ties with China in pursuit of economic growth.
During his visit to London last week, Liu also met Tony Blair, the former prime minister. Blair, who is expected to travel to China later this year, continues to informally advise senior figures in the UK and US on foreign policy matters.
If you put up a barrier, people will find a way around it. So its not shocking to read recent news stories about how some businesses are trying to skirt around tariffs – particularly from China.
They’re shipping goods through third countries, rather than directly from China, using special “shoppers” to skirt minimum quantity amounts, colluding with suppliers to falsify country-of-origin labels, undervaluing goods, or “assembling” products out of China where tariffs are lower. They’re creating shell companies in more tariff-friendly countries and even going so far as forging certificates of origin (thanks ChatGPT!) and otherwise falsifying shipping documentation in collusion with, or independently from, their suppliers.
I get it. Whether you’re a supporter or not of the administration’s tariff policies, you’re still likely fed up with Donald Trump’s almost daily changes of his mind, the court cases, the lack of process, the chaos, the Tweets (sorry Xs, no, wait Truths).
It’s not as if businesses don’t do this stuff all the time. For thousands of years, butchers have been putting their fingers on the scale; middlemen pocketed a few stolen pennies or denarii or drachmas behind their customers’ backs. I have clients who regularly undervalue (or even hide) their inventory, keep two sets of books, fail to report cash receipts, run their personal expenses through their companies. The list goes on.
But none of this is a great idea.
As a certified public accountant, I have a professional obligation to not only point this kind of behavior out to my clients but to disengage from providing services to those who are breaking the law, or at the very least demonstrating a significant lack of ethics. I warn them about the downsides: the penalties, the fines, the potential jail time for criminal behavior. I try to make them understand that behaving this way risks ruining relationships with suppliers, customers, partners and employees. If caught it’s both professionally and personally humiliating and not the kind of PR that will benefit your company. And it definitely upsets those in the community who are doing their best to abide by the law.
And when it comes to tariffs, there are other – legal – ways to either avoid or reduce their impact on your business. You could use bonded or free trade zone warehouses. You could raise prices, cut other costs, invest in technologies. You can use new resources from the Small Business Administration to find domestic suppliers or lean into organizations like the World Trade Center Association to find alternate suppliers in more tariff-friendly locales.
And yet, I know – and read – of a not-insignificant number of business people who insist on just skirting the law. Why? It’s down to risk. Every decision one makes when running a business – or living your life – involves a risk/reward analysis.
Rolling out a new product? It’s possible no one buys it. Investing in a piece of property? Getting on an airplane? Crossing the street? We all take risks every day because we want the rewards. Some people have a higher tolerance for this stuff. Those are the ones playing the tariff lottery, risking that their number won’t get picked.
The business people I know who are willing to take these risks – even if they’re on dubious legal grounds – all have a reason to back up their actions. Maybe they were “completely ignorant, innocent or naïve” about the law. Or they come up with some legal explanation for their actions, regardless of how flimsy or far-fetched. Some of them have no problem throwing their supplier or employee or customer under the bus and then sleeping like a baby that night. They don’t just hope that no one finds out. They have a story to tell.
Personally, this is not for me. I’m not a big risk taker. And, like most people, I’m a pretty bad liar.
A prominent Democratic state lawmaker in Minnesota and her husband were killed and another Democratic state lawmaker and his wife were shot in the early hours of Saturday.
State representative Melissa Hortman died, as has her husband, Mark, the state’s governor, Tim Walz, confirmed at a press conference on Saturday. Walz said the shooting “appears to be a politically motivated assassination”. Hortman was the top Democrat in the Minnesota house and the former speaker. The Democratic state senator John Hoffman and his wife, Yvette, were both shot multiple times and are out of surgery, and Walz said he was “cautiously optimistic” both will survive.
The suspect was still at large, police said on Saturday, and the suburb of Brooklyn Park was under a shelter-in-place order as checkpoints were set up through the town. Police lifted a shelter-in-place order in the afternoon, saying they had reason to believe the suspect was no longer in the area. The shooter was impersonating a police officer, and was dressed in a uniform that would appear to be real to most people, police said.
The FBI named 57-year old man Vance Luther Boelter as the suspect, and offered a reward of up to $50,000 for information leading to his arrest and conviction.
Later on Saturday, the FBI added Boelter to their most wanted list. One of the photos released by the FBI shows Boelter in a full-head mask – giving him the appearance of being bald – on a front porch, shining a flashlight and dressed as a police officer.
“No Kings” protests against the Trump administration were set for midday at the Minnesota state capitol and around the country, but the Minnesota state patrol and Walz asked the state’s public not to attend “out of an abundance of caution”. The state patrol said No Kings flyers had been found inside the suspect’s vehicle.
Organizers said they would cancel events across the state that had not already started, though the main protest at the state capitol continued, with many thousands of people pouring into the blocks surrounding the capitol and marching through St Paul.
Brooklyn Park’s police chief, Mark Bruley, said the suspect drove a vehicle that looked identical to an SUV police squad car. He said: “It was equipped with lights, emergency lights, that looked exactly like a police vehicle, and yes, they were wearing a vest with Taser, other equipment, a badge very similar to mine, that, no question, if they were in this room, you would assume that they are a police officer.”
The suspect had a manifesto and a list of other lawmakers and officials in the vehicle searched by police, Bruley said. The shooter’s list also included abortion rights supporters, the Minnesota Star Tribune reports.
“There was a list of individuals, and the individuals that were targeted in this situation were on that list,” said Drew Evans, the superintendent of the Minnesota bureau of criminal apprehension. He added that it was “far too early in the investigation” to provide a motive or assess whether the victims had been targeted for their political affiliation.
Boelter has an extensive résumé, as well as numerous ties to Minnesota politics. He was appointed twice to the state’s workforce development board, first in 2016 by former governor Mark Dayton and again in 2019 by Walz.
Boelter is listed as the director of security patrols for his wife’s security company, Praetorian Guard. His Praetorian bio touts involvement with “security situations in eastern Europe, Africa, North America and the Middle East, including the West Bank, southern Lebanon and the Gaza Strip”.
Boelter is also listed as the chief executive of the DR Congo-based Red Lion Group, whose website has since been taken down. Archived pages show the Red Lion Group’s involvement in various industrial projects, including oil refining, glass production and logging.
Reporting by Wired detailed Boelter’s past involvement in founding Revoformation, an evangelical ministry. Boelter’s bio states that he “sought out militant Islamists in order to share the gospel”.
In a video from the Star Tribune, Boelter’s roommate read aloud a text sent by him after the shootings.
“I made some choices, and you guys don’t know anything about this, but I’m going to be gone for a while. May be dead shortly,” part of the text reads.
“We’re here today because an unspeakable tragedy has unfolded in Minnesota,” Walz said. “My good friend and colleague, Speaker Melissa Hortman, and her husband, Mark, were shot and killed early this morning in what appears to be a politically motivated assassination. Our state lost a great leader, and I lost the dearest of friends.”
“This was an act of targeted political violence,” Walz said.
At about 2am local time, police received a call in Champlin, a suburb of Minneapolis, that Hoffman and his wife had been shot, Evans said. After seeing who the victims were, police sent officers to proactively check on Hortman’s home in Brooklyn Park about nine miles away.
Upon arrival at Hortman’s house about 3.30am, officers saw a supposed police vehicle in the driveway with emergency lights on and what appeared to be an officer coming out of the house, Bruley said. The gunman, impersonating an officer, immediately fired at them, and then was able to escape out the back of the house, Bruley said.
“This is somebody that clearly had been impersonating a police officer, again, using the trust of this badge and this uniform to manipulate their way into the home,” Bruley said.
Police found a man with gunshot wounds, Hortman’s husband, and administered first aid, but he was pronounced dead shortly after. Officers then used a drone to identify the woman, Hortman, in the home.
Multiple bullet holes could be seen in the front door of Hoffman’s home.
Bob Jacobson, the commissioner of the state’s department of public safety, said there was increased security in place for elected officials and others who may be at risk.
“This is a dark day today for Minnesota and for democracy,” Jacobson said.
Minnesota’s house of representatives was evenly split between Republicans and Democrats. Democrats have a one-vote majority in the state senate.
In an interview with NBC, the Minnesota senator Amy Klobuchar, a Democrat, stressed the importance of condemning “violence of all ideologies” and making sure “more people don’t get killed”. Klobuchar spoke about coming up in the political ranks alongside Hortman, and the closeness of Minnesota’s political community.
“It’s just a time of mourning for us. It’s a shock. Many of us were with her last night at a dinner in Minnesota,” Klobuchar said. “And then the other legislator was also loved. We hope he’s going to survive. He and his wife were shot several times.”
Donald Trump said in a statement that he had been briefed on the shootings, which appeared to be a “targeted attack against state lawmakers”. The US attorney general, Pam Bondi, would prosecute anyone involved “to the fullest extent of the law”, Trump said.
The shootings took place at a time when political violence has become more commonplace in the US, though the vast majority of Americans do not support it, according to a University of Chicago survey.
On the main stage at the No Kings rally on Saturday afternoon, organizers mentioned the tragedy, saying how it strengthened their resolve and underscored the importance of gathering together.
Kristin Cheronis drew a quick sign that said “Thank you, Melissa”, a nod to Hortman. Normally, Cheronis said, when you attend a rally, you feel pumped up and recommitted to the cause. “It’s like some of that, plus mourning. It’s just horrifying, and it’s all so upsetting,” she said.
“It’s really sad, especially someone who was not even a divisive character, a complete and total public servant, who had no dreams of going to Washington or some bigger stage, really just kind of working hard for the people,” she said of Hortman.
Los Angeles police moved aggressively to disperse the last of the crowds at Saturday’s otherwise peaceful anti-Trump protest downtown, using officers on horseback to clear an area around a federal building with batons and wooden sticks. They fired tear canisters and foam rubber bullets when some of the demonstrators started to regroup.
Hours after the main part of the protest had concluded and most of the participants and organizers had left, a crowd of a few dozen people congregated outside a federal office building, away from the approved protest zone, and began shouting at a line of stone-faced US marines standing guard outside the plate-glass entrance.
“Leave LA! Leave LA!” they chanted at the soldiers, ordered into the city by Donald Trump to the fury of California’s political leadership and many ordinary Angelenos.
As the standoff intensified, the marines stepped forward with riot shields to stop the protesters from climbing a set of steps leading up to the entrance. The Los Angeles police issued a dispersal order, which some in the crowd appear not to have heard, declaring the protest to be an “unlawful assembly”.
The horses arrived at about 4pm, and the teargas started flying shortly after.
While the many hours of officially sanctioned protest earlier had been overwhelmingly joyful, with music and chanting and little evident police presence besides a helicopter hovering above, the tail end felt immediately more confrontational.
The hostility towards the marines stood in contrast to earlier scenes of demonstrators shaking hands with national guard troops stationed outside a federal courthouse, offering them water and taking selfies.
The change in atmosphere was reminiscent of the late afternoon of the first big protest in the same part of the city last Sunday, when a minority of protesters, many of them heavily masked, threw bottles and charged at police lines and ended up throwing rocks at police cruisers and setting cars on fire.
Some of the demonstrators who regrouped after the afternoon’s initial dispersal had umbrellas to fend off police projectiles. Others wore helmets and gas masks. The confrontations kept going for at least an hour and spilled over from the area outside the federal building and a nearby federal courthouse back towards city hall, where the earlier rally and march had begun.
Jim McDonnell, the Los Angeles police chief, told a news briefing earlier in the day that his officers would do everything they could to safeguard people’s right to protest peacefully but would not hesitate to make arrests if people broke the law.
Last Tuesday, mayor Karen Bass instituted a nightly curfew in downtown Los Angeles, starting at 8pm, after days of vandalism and violence on the fringes of otherwise peaceful protest.
Ahead of the day’s “No Kings” protests, Bass had warned of the potential political consequences of failing to remain peaceful.
“Please, please do not give the administration an excuse to intervene,” she told the early morning news briefing. “Let’s make sure we show the world the best of Los Angeles and our country. Let’s stand in contrast to the provocation, escalation and violence.”
Los Angeles’ civic leaders did not immediately comment on the late afternoon trouble or provide arrest numbers.
The LA Times reported one protester receiving stitches after being shot in the nose with a rubber bullet and another with a broken finger. Some demonstrators told the paper they had scaled a chain-link fence to get away from police officers chasing them.
Please join me for a quick game of “is this sex-positive feminism or just a lazy repackaging of the patriarchy”? Today’s protagonist is Sabrina Carpenter, a pop star whose music videos have got a Brooklyn priest demoted and might have played a small role in getting the mayor of New York, Eric Adams, indicted.
On Wednesday, Carpenter revealed the cover art for her forthcoming album Man’s Best Friend in a social media post, which featured two photos side by side. One was a closeup of what appears to be a fluffy dog with a collar bearing the words “man’s best friend”. The other is a photo of Carpenter on her hands and knees in front of a man who is pulling her by the hair.
The imagery has caused controversy and drawn mixed reactions. On the one hand, you’ve got people who think Carpenter is being clever. On the other hand, you’ve got people who think she is being crass and catering to the male gaze in a way that is extremely unhelpful to women.
In the latter camp is Glasgow Women’s Aid, a Scottish group that helps victims of domestic violence. They have called the imagery “regressive” and “a throwback to tired tropes that reduce women to pets, props, and possessions and promote an element of violence and control”.
Some people on social media vehemently disagree. “i am a little concerned about peoples inability to immediately clock that the cover is obviously a commentary on the way women are treated, especially with the context of manchild [the lead single from the album] and the album being called man’s best friend like guys omfg think,” someone in the “Sabrina’s doing satire!” camp posted. That got over 53,000 likes. (I, myself, am a little concerned about people’s inability to use apostrophes.)
Meanwhile, Diet Prada (an influential Instagram account with more than 3.4 million followers) posted a picture of the video with the line “let women be h*rny on main” and a caption that essentially called Carpenter’s critics stupid prudes.
I’m all for letting “women be h*rny on main” but I’m having a hard time seeing Carpenter’s cover art as either satire or sex-positive feminism. Sure, some of the best satire is extremely subtle. But this isn’t subtle or sex-positive – it’s just soft porn pandering to the male gaze.
At a different point in time I suppose you might be able to make the case that this sort of imagery was edgy and subversive. Madonna, for example, used her sexuality to challenge social norms. But at the current moment, when sexualized imagery is everywhere, women’s rights are being aggressively rolled back in the US, and there is backlash to women’s rights around the world, Carpenter’s cover art isn’t subverting anything.
The hair-grabbing visual is in particularly poor taste considering recent court testimony that Sean “Diddy” Combs grabbed his then girlfriend Cassie Ventura by the hair and dragged her into another room where he assaulted her. There is also very disturbing video surveillance of Combs assaulting Ventura. If Carpenter’s fans can’t see all the problems with this imagery, then it’s because internalized misogyny is everywhere – and it’s a real bitch. (Combs has pleaded not guilty to charges of sex trafficking, racketeering conspiracy and transportation to engage in prostitution.)
None of this, to be clear, is an attack on Carpenter. In my best middle-aged woman voice I’d like to say that I’m not angry, I’m just disappointed. I think Carpenter is very talented and particularly appreciate her track record on taking down awful men. Please, Sabrina, you’ve helped take down one mayor. Why not train your creative energy on trying to stop Andrew Cuomo, the disgraced former governor of New York, who has spent millions of dollars in taxpayer money on an aggressive legal battle against the women who have accused him of sexual harassment, from becoming mayor of New York? Forget man’s best friend, pull that off and you’ll be a lot of women’s best friend.
The activist, who was recently deported from Israel after taking part in an attempt to bring a symbolic aid shipment to starving Gaza, responded by saying the world needs more angry women. It certainly does.
Olorato Mongale, 30, was allegedly murdered by a man she went on a date with – it’s one of the more high-profile murders in a country with the highest rates of femicide in the world. “Women die no matter what they do,” one activist told the Guardian. “They’ve been stabbed while they sleep, shot in broad daylight and had their houses burned down by former partners.”
According to CNN Brasil, the influencer Taís Bruna de Castro, 36, was murdered in the food court of a shopping complex where she worked; the suspect is a janitor who worked in the same complex. The janitor reportedly told investigators that he killed the influencer because she didn’t want to pursue a relationship with him.
Four women and three girls (two of whom were believed to be under five) recently died after a boat carrying migrants capsized just metres from a pier in the port of one of Spain’s Canary Islands. An increasing number of women are now trying to migrate from west Africa. “Women are becoming the main actors in their own migration process, whereas in the past it was usually the men who migrated first and the women joined later,” one expert told the Guardian.
Sign up to The Week in Patriarchy
Get Arwa Mahdawi’s weekly recap of the most important stories on feminism and sexism and those fighting for equality
after newsletter promotion
Gyutsova is a Bulgarian influencer who, per DW, doles out misogynistic advice to men and incites violence against women. “On her social media channels, she not only encourages people to degrade women and use violence against them, she also boasts that she uses the same methods on her child and her cat,” one commentator told DW. I guess Gyutsova has discovered that misogyny can be a lucrative grift.
All the vol-gay-noe jokes you could want for Pride month. A little palate cleanser for everyone who feels like exploding with rage at the moment.
Women’s Health profiles Jan Todd, who broke the world record in the women’s deadlift when she was 22 and went on to a career in academia. “Her research discoveries are the reason we now know about the all-but-forgotten history of heavy resistance training among Victorian girls and women on both sides of the Atlantic,” the outlet notes. Turns out Victorian women were swole.
This is the sort of thing that shouldn’t be news story in 2025 but unfortunately is. Good on Labour MP Luke Charters, however, for being part of a small group of politicians agitating for better paternity leave for fathers and leading by example.
“As nine in 10 households [in Gaza] face extreme water shortages, the lack of clean water, soap, and privacy has turned menstruation into a source of anxiety, isolation, and shame,” UN agencies have said. If you’re British and angry about this, there’s a handy tool here to check if your MP supports war crimes against Palestinians. Do not allow your female lawmakers to posture as feminists if they support genocide.
Would you like to see a baby camel called Faye say “hey?” A lot of people do! A TikTok of Faye posted by her owner, a south-east Missouri camel farmer called Flaire Ferrell, has got millions of views. Ferrell has said he’s using the viral moment to try to change misconceptions about camels being mean-spirited and prone to spitting. If you raise a camel right not only will they be polite, they’ll never desert you.
Arwa Mahdawi is a Guardian columnist
The federal Immigration and Customs Enforcement (Ice) agency has exponentially increased the arrest and detention of immigrants without any criminal history since the second Trump administration took office, a data analysis by the Guardian shows.
The information sharply contradicts Donald Trump’s claims the authorities are targeting “criminals” for deportation as part of his aggressive anti-immigration agenda.
According to numbers gathered from Ice and the Vera Institute of Justice, after Trump returned to the White House in late January there was a steep surge in arrests of immigrants, in general. One of the sharpest increases in arrest numbers has been of immigrants with pending charges, who have not yet been convicted of any crimes.
But the biggest increase has been people with no charges at all. Between early January, right before the inauguration, and June, there has been an 807% increase in the arrest of immigrants with no criminal record.
The Department of Homeland Security and top White House officials continue to claim that Ice is targeting “criminals” and “criminal illegal aliens”. But the Ice data shows the agency is not just targeting those with criminal records. Being undocumented in the US is a civil infraction, not a criminal offense.
“The group of people arrested with only immigration violations used to be very, very small,” said Austin Kocher, an assistant research professor at Syracuse University. “The data reflects the fact that Ice is in the community, arresting an awful lot of people who don’t have criminal histories. It doesn’t reflect what the agency has claimed they’re doing, which is going after the hardened criminals first, which I don’t think the data supports.”
Ice is certainly arresting people with criminal records, but the administration has not published data on what crimes people have been convicted of. Detailed statistics on arrestees is not available for 2025, but between October 2022 and November 2024, 78% of people arrested by the agency had a misdemeanor conviction or no conviction at all.
Only 21% of people over that two year time period had a felony criminal conviction, a Guardian analysis of monthly Ice enforcement and removal operations shows. It is impossible to know how many people arrested since January have a felony criminal conviction because the government has not released that data.
The sharpest increase in non-criminal arrests is following a late-May meeting, in which Trump administration officials yelled at top Ice officials, ordering them to arrest more immigrants. During that meeting, DHS secretary Kristi Noem and White House deputy chief of staff Stephen Miller ordered Ice to arrest at least 3,000 people per day, which would be 1 million per year.
Trump ran on a campaign of engaging in “mass deportations” and since he took office his administration has escalated its tactics to meet that goal.
As the Guardian reported this month, on 31 May, top Ice managers instructed officers throughout the country to “turn the creative knob up to 11” to increase arrests. The internal Ice emails reviewed by the Guardian show officers were told to interview and potentially arrest “collaterals”, meaning people coincidentally present during an arrest. In the past, Ice typically targeted immigrants with arrest warrants. Now more people without any criminal history are being swept up in the dragnet.
And the Trump White House has ordered an increase in the number of officials engaging in immigration enforcement operations. Special agents from various federal law enforcement agencies – including the FBI, the DEA, the ATF and Homeland Security Investigations – have been delegated to perform immigration enforcement work. There has also been an increase in the number of local jurisdictions deputized by Ice to carry out immigration enforcement work.
The increase in immigration arrests has led to a rise in the number of people detained in Ice facilities nationwide. Kocher has been documenting these numbers closely, and tracked that as of 1 June, there were 51,302 people detained in immigration jails – the highest number since 2019.
According to Kocher, the Trump administration has increased the number of people in detention so quickly that it is challenging to provide meaningful oversight.
“We know that these facilities are overcrowded, they’re over capacity for what they are designed for,” said Kocher. “Practically speaking, it means people are sleeping on the floor, they may not be getting enough food, they’re almost certainly not getting adequate medical care.”
In a statement, the Department of Homeland Security told the Guardian that “since the beginning of President Trump’s second term, we have arrested over 236,000 illegal aliens and have deported over 207,000”. However, according to the government’s own data, since October, 186,000 people have been booked into immigration detention for the first time. DHS did not respond to follow-up questions regarding the discrepancy between the government data and the numbers the Trump administration is publicizing.
Kocher said, in response to the discrepancy in the numbers: “I think they’re being dishonest and un-transparent because they are counting things in ways they have never been counted before to favor their political agenda and the perception they are trying to send to the base.”
For advocates, one of the most outrageous steps has been the practice of engaging in arrests at immigration courts around the country. Asylum seekers going through the lengthy legal process of requesting to stay in the US have been targeted by immigration officials. After government attorneys dismiss their cases, Ice officials waiting in hallways or lobbies have arrested asylum seekers.
Organizations are challenging the Trump administration’s increasing efforts to arrest people at immigration courts.
Last week, Innovation Law Lab, a legal organization that represents immigrants in civil rights cases, filed a suit against the Trump administration in Oregon to block the practice of courthouse arrests.
On June 11, some Republican members of congress wrote to Ice expressing concern, saying, in part: “There are levels of priority that must be considered when it comes to immigration enforcement.”
The letter was sent to Todd Lyons, acting director of Ice, from Texas representative Tony Gonzales, chairman of the Congressional Hispanic Conference, and five other members of the GOP group.
“Every minute that we spend pursuing an individual with a clean record is a minute less that we dedicate to apprehending terrorists or cartel operatives,” the letter said.
As tanks and soldiers paraded through the streets of Washington on Saturday, several million people around the country turned out to protest against the excesses of Donald Trump’s administration.
The protests, dubbed “No Kings”, took place at about 2,100 sites nationwide, from big cities to small towns. A coalition of more than 100 groups joined together to plan the protests, which are committed to a principle of nonviolence.
This week, the president has deployed national guard and US marine troops to Los Angeles to crack down on protesters who have demonstrated against his ramped-up deportations, defying state and local authorities in a show of military force that hasn’t been seen in the US since the civil rights era. Interest in the Saturday protests rose as a result, organizers said, including at a site near Trump’s south Florida Mar-a-Lago estate.
No Kings organizers estimated the day’s events drew millions of people, with some hundreds still under way in all 50 states and to some cities abroad. These included more than 200,000 in New York and over 100,000 in Philadelphia, plus some small towns with sizable crowds for their populations, including the town of Pentwater, Michigan, which saw 400 people join the protest in their 800-person town, the No Kings coalition said.
The protests were largely peaceful, though some – in Los Angeles and Portland – were later deemed unlawful assembly by law enforcement and met with teargas.
The tenor of the day was also marked by political violence. There were two early morning shootings of two Democratic lawmakers in Minnesota, one of whom was killed along with her husband, in what local officials called a politically motivated attack. The state’s police and governor cautioned people to not attend demonstrations across the state “out of an abundance of caution”.
Many thousands of people still turned up at the main protest in Minnesota, at the state capitol, to make it clear that political violence wouldn’t silence them. Crowds stretched for blocks as people carried signs against Trump, and some that mentioned the names of the lawmakers who were shot. On the main stage, organizers mentioned the tragedy, saying how it strengthened their resolve and underscored the importance of gathering together.
Perry McGowan carried a sign with the names of the two lawmakers – Melissa Hortman and John Hoffman – and a red heart.
“We are all affected by not just by political violence, but all violence in our lives,” he said. “And there’s way too much of it – way too much gun violence, way too much television hate, way too much inhumanity to your neighbors, and we need to push back on that and to contribute civility to our common good.”
In Texas, officials said they had “identified a credible threat toward state lawmakers planning to attend” a “No Kings” demonstration at the state capitol, the Associated Press reported.
In Philadelphia, meanwhile, thousands marched from Love Park in the early afternoon, holding umbrellas and signs.
Victor, a 56-year-old chef originally from Argentina, held a hand-painted sign that depicted Trump as a pig, with “Oink” painted atop his image in large letters. “Other people have the right to work hard and make a life for themselves when they come from a country where they can’t do that or are facing political oppression or are desperate,” he said. “This is supposed to be the land of opportunity and a land built on immigrants.”
He was disappointed by the military parade happening 123 miles (200km) away in Washington DC. “It’s a perverse show of power unnecessarily,” he said.
In some Republican-led states, governors had pre-emptively signaled that law enforcement would quell any protests that they deemed violent.
Greg Abbott, the Republican Texas governor, deployed his state’s national guard to manage protests ahead of “No Kings” and amid ongoing demonstrations against Trump’s immigration agenda. Florida’s Republican governor, Ron DeSantis, said that people could legally run over protesters with their cars if they were surrounded. “You don’t have to sit there and just be a sitting duck and let the mob grab you out of your car and drag you through the streets. You have a right to defend yourself in Florida,” he said.
Although most protests went without incident, some saw threats and safety issues.
The “No Kings” protests at Georgia’s capitol unfolded without police confronting demonstrators, but police dispersed a protest with smoke and teargas in a suburban neighborhood that is home to a high concentration of Hispanic residents.
And in San Francisco, NBC News reported that a driver hit at least four demonstrators who reportedly suffered “non life-threatening injuries”, while in Virginia a man drove an SUV through a crowd and injured one protester.
Early in the day demonstrations gathered strength outside Los Angeles city hall, awash with American flags. After a week of Trump administration officials and their allies seizing on the Mexican flags waved by LA street protesters and saying they were symptoms of a foreign invasion, many brought US flags from home, either waving them or wrapping them around their shoulders. Others took them from volunteers handing them out at sites across the rally.
Later in the day in Los Angeles, a crowd formed outside a federal building and started chanting, “Leave LA!” at the national guard members stationed outside and some reportedly threw objects at the building.
At 4pm the LAPD also declared “unlawful assembly” for protesters who were outside the approved protest area, issued a dispersal order and began firing teargas and foam rubber bullets shortly after. Most of the crowd dispersed quickly. Unlike the morning protests, there were more masked protesters in the evening.
In Portland, Oregon, federal agents reportedly also used teargas against demonstrators outside of an Immigration and Customs Enforcement (Ice) facility after they said the protesters attempted to breach the door.
The coalition did not hold a protest in Washington DC – an intentional choice to draw contrast with the military parade and to not give the president an excuse to crack down on peaceful protest. But a DC-based organization hosted a “DC Joy Day” in the district that will “celebrate DC’s people, culture, and our connections to one another”.
A separate group of about 300, organized by Refuse Fascism, marched to the White House to protest. Army veteran Chris Yeazel was among the protesters and said he came out in reaction to Trump’s deployment of troops to Los Angeles, and his speech to army soldiers at Fort Bragg, which has been criticized for its partisan tone.
“This is the nation’s capital,” Yeazel said. “This is exactly where we need to protest.”
Trump initially said people who protested the parade would be met with “very big force”, though the White House then attempted to clarify he was fine with peaceful protest. Asked about the “No Kings” protests during a White House event on Thursday, Trump said: “I don’t feel like a king. I have to go through hell to get things approved.”

The best public interest journalism relies on first-hand accounts from people in the know. 

If you have something to share on this subject you can contact us confidentially using the following methods.
Secure Messaging in the Guardian app
The Guardian app has a tool to send tips about stories. Messages are end to end encrypted and concealed within the routine activity that every Guardian mobile app performs. This prevents an observer from knowing that you are communicating with us at all, let alone what is being said.

If you don't already have the Guardian app, download it (iOS/Android) and go to the menu. Select 'Secure Messaging'. 
SecureDrop, instant messengers, email, telephone and post
See our guide at theguardian.com/tips for alternative methods and the pros and cons of each. 
Since the start of his second term, opposition to Trump has grown, manifesting in protests and demonstrations including against Elon Musk at his car company, against deportations, around his retribution agenda and government cuts.
Harvard University’s Crowd Counting Consortium, which tracks political crowds, found that there had been three times as many protests by the end of March 2025 compared to 2017, during Trump’s first term, and that was before major protests in April and May. The biggest day of protest so far came on 5 April, with “Hands Off”, which the consortium estimated drew as many as 1.5 million people, a lower figure than organizers cited.
“Overall, 2017’s numbers pale in comparison to the scale and scope of mobilization in 2025 – a fact often unnoticed in the public discourse about the response to Trump’s actions,” a new analysis from the consortium said.
 The cover image on this article’s top video was changed on 15 June 2025 to better reflect its content.
Israel’s offensive against Iran is the latest link in a chain of events triggered by the attack launched by Hamas from Gaza into Israel on 7 October 2023. All have successively weakened Tehran and, militarily at least, empowered Israel. Without each, it is difficult to see how the new offensive it launched directly against Iran on Friday might be possible.
The first was the Israeli offensive in Gaza. This has now killed tens of thousands of Palestinians, but within weeks had militarily degraded Hamas sufficiently for the Islamist militant organisation to no longer pose a significant current threat to Israeli citizens.
As Hamas was part of the so-called axis of resistance, a coalition of similar organisations across the Middle East assembled by Tehran over the last decade or so to project power across the region and to deter Israel from striking at Iran’s nuclear programme, this had major regional implications.
Then, in April last year, Israel bombed the Iranian embassy complex in Damascus, killing seven people. In response, Iran attacked Israel directly for the first time, launching an ineffective barrage of drones. The conflict between Iran and Israel, long fought through proxies, assassinations and strikes away from Israeli soil, had now spilled into the open.
By the autumn, with Hamas weakened, Israel could turn against Hezbollah, the Lebanese-based, Iran-supported group that was by far the most potent of the members of the axis of resistance.
In September, Israel eliminated the entire leadership echelon of Hezbollah as well as most of its feared missile stockpile and invaded its heartland in southern Lebanon without meeting significant resistance. Even Hezbollah loyalists acknowledged it had suffered a swingeing defeat.
Again, Iran launched another ineffective air offensive against Israel, which responded with airstrikes that wiped out much of Iran’s air defence system, opening the way to Friday’s wider attack.
Equally consequentially, Hezbollah’s sudden weakness meant it was unable to come to the defence of the al-Assad regime in Syria, another crucial Iranian ally, when rebels there launched an offensive. The fall of Assad in December ended decades of close relations between Tehran and Damascus. This further weakened the crumbling axis of resistance, exposed Iranian proxies in Syria and meant Israeli warplanes could reach vulnerable targets in Iran more easily.
With Iran-backed militias in Syria and in Iraq convinced that turning rhetorical threats to attack Israel into action was a poor idea, the Houthis in Yemen were left as the only remaining member of the axis of resistance still engaged in hostilities with Israel. They harassed shipping in the Red Sea but the ballistic missiles they lobbed hopefully at Tel Aviv could cause no significant strategic harm.
By early spring of this year, the decision of Ali Khamenei, Iran’s supreme leader, to entrust Iran’s security to its proxies looked a supreme miscalculation and Benjamin Netanyahu, Israel’s prime minister, keen to exploit what might be a transient window of opportunity, began preparing the major offensive he has long hoped to launch.
A deadline of April was missed, but not one set inadvertently by President Trump who allowed just 60 days for talks with Tehran to come to a new agreement on Iran’s nuclear programme, which Israel claims was close to producing a nuclear weapon. That limit expired last week.
Netanyahu told Iranians on Friday that he hoped Israel’s continuing military operation in Iran will “clear the path for you to achieve your freedom”.
Even if Israel is not seeking to turn back the clock to years before the 1979 Iranian revolution, when the country was a close ally of Israel and of the US too, the nature of the targets Israeli planners chose may have the effect of at least dismantling the regime that has ruled ever since that seismic event.
This is partly a consequence of the central role still played in Iran by a generation of men who began their careers in the aftermath of the fall of the Shah or even earlier.
The first casualties on Friday included many senior officers who were among the earliest recruits to the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC), which was founded in 1980 to protect the new rule of the radical clerics and then evolved into the beating ideological activist heart of the revolutionary project. Several were also veterans of the Iran-Iraq war, which lasted from 1980 to 1988 and which many historians regard as the crucible in which the current regime was forged.
At least one of the nuclear scientists killed in the first wave of strikes was a veteran of the IRGC too. Ali Shamkhani, a senior aide to Khamenei who was targeted, had been an underground Islamist activist in the 1970s before filling a series of increasingly important roles. Khamenei himself came to power as the successor to the Ayatollah Khomeini in 1989 but began his activist Islamist career in the late 60s.
It is extremely unlikely that, when the dust finally clears after this war, Iran reverts to a pro-Israeli or pro-US stance. But what does appear very probable is that the power of men who first overthrew the shah and then led the revolutionary regime over subsequent decades will be gravely, possibly fatally, weakened.
Vladimir Putin told US counterpart Donald Trump on Saturday that Moscow was ready to hold a fresh round of peace talks with Kyiv after 22 June, once the sides complete exchanging prisoners and soldiers’ bodies. Putin and Trump held a 50-minute phone call on Saturday to discuss the escalating situation in the Middle East and Ukraine peace talks, Putin aide Yuri Ushakov said. Trump posted on Truth Social to say Putin had called “to very nicely wish me a Happy Birthday” on the day he turned 79, but that “more importantly” the two discussed the Iran-Israel crisis: “He feels, as do I, this war in Israel-Iran should end, to which I explained, his war should also end,” Trump said, referring to the Russia-Ukraine conflict. Putin and Trump held a call for the fifth time since the Republican took office, in a stark pivot from the approach of his predecessor Joe Biden’s administration. Trump hinted at follow-up discussions on the war in Ukraine in the coming week.
Ukraine’s leader Volodymyr Zelenskyy meanwhile did not mention whether Ukraine would agree to the next round of talks, only saying that “the exchanges will be completed and the parties will discuss the next step.” Zelenskyy urged the United States to “shift tone” in its dialogue with Russia, saying it was “too warm” and would not help to end the fighting. He said he hoped that the escalation between Israel and Iran would not result in a drop in military aid to Kyiv, according to remarks published on Saturday: “We would like to see aid to Ukraine not decrease because of this,” he said. “Last time, this was a factor that slowed down aid to Ukraine.” The recent escalation sparked fears Washington might relocate resources at its expense, to beef up the defence of its close ally Israel which unleashed a large-scale attack on Iran Friday.
A sharp rise in global oil prices following Israeli strikes on Iran will benefit Russia and bolster its military capabilities in the war in Ukraine, Zelenskyy said on Friday in comments that were under embargo until Saturday afternoon. Speaking to journalists in Kyiv, Zelenskyy said the surge in oil prices threatened Ukraine’s position on the battlefield, especially because western allies have not enforced effective price caps on Russian oil exports. “The strikes led to a sharp increase in the price of oil, which is negative for us,” Zelenskyy said. “The Russians are getting stronger due to greater income from oil exports.”
Earlier on Saturday, Ukraine and Russia swapped prisoners in the fourth such exchange this week, part of a large-scale plan to bring back 1,000 wounded prisoners from each side and return the bodies of dead soldiers. The prisoner agreement was the only visible result of two recent rounds of talks in Istanbul. Photos published by Zelenskyy on Telegram showed men of various ages, draped in Ukrainian flags. Some were injured, others disembarked from buses and hugged those welcoming them, or were seen calling someone by phone, sometimes covering their faces or smiling. Moscow’s defence ministry released its own video showing men in uniforms holding Russian flags, clapping and chanting “Glory to Russia” and “hooray”, some raising their fists in the air. However, Russian state media reported that Moscow had not received any of its war dead back from Kyiv, echoing a statement Russia made on Friday, when it returned the bodies of 1,200 slain Ukrainian soldiers. Zelenskyy said he expected the prisoner swaps to continue until 20 or 21 June.
Zelenskyy said on Saturday that Ukrainian forces had recaptured Andriivka village in northeastern Sumy region. Zelenskyy also claimed “successful actions” near Pokrovsk, for months a focus of Russian attacks in their slow advance on the eastern front, and “strong results” near Kupiansk, an area in northeastern Ukraine that has come under heavy Russian pressure. Global news agencies including Reuters could not verify the battlefield reports. Since the start of the month, Russia has intensified its advances along the frontline, especially in the north-eastern Ukrainian region of Sumy, where it seeks to establish a “buffer zone”. Russia’s defence ministry said on Saturday that its forces had seized the village of Zelenyi Kut, southwest of Pokrovsk. Zelenskyy said Ukrainian troops had maintained defensive lines along more than 1,000 km of the frontline. He also dismissed Moscow’s claims that Russian troops had crossed into the central Ukrainian region of Dnipropetrovsk. Dnipropetrovsk borders three regions that are partially occupied by Russia – Donetsk, Kherson and Zaporizhzhia. Russia now controls about one-fifth of Ukrainian territory.
The G7 summit in Kananaskis, Canada is likely to be dominated by efforts to persuade Donald Trump to dilute an America-first strategy, which world leaders fear may put the global economy into recession, and entrench the war in Gaza, Ukraine and Iran – three conflicts Trump once promised to solve.
The summit represents the first collective opportunity for western leaders to challenge Trump with the consequences of his unilateralism, but with the world on a knife-edge, the six leaders cannot risk being seen to gang up on him and spark a presidential explosion.
The last time Trump attended a G7 summit hosted by Canada, in his first term in 2018, he arrived late, demanded Russia be permitted to attend future gatherings, described former prime minister Justin Trudeau as dishonest and weak, and then from his departed plane tweeted that the US was withdrawing from the communique he had agreed to sign.
The current Canadian host, Mark Carney, might not even attempt to agree a joint communique at the summit if he fears it will be a recipe for fruitless rows, but that would be a last resort. Out of deference to Trump, the climate crisis has already been erased from the agenda.
The largely informal talks provide a rare change for the leaders to press Trump about shared values and specifically on a timetable to impose further sanctions on Vladimir Putin, a step he has repeatedly delayed. Volodymyr Zelenskyy will also be present, marking the first time the two men will have met since Russia and Ukraine failed to agree a ceasefire in Istanbul.
European leaders will test Trump to see if he will agree to the price cap on Russian oil being lowered from $60 a barrel to $45, a means of undercutting the Russian war budget. The concept of the cap was invented at the G7, and tightening it is included in Europe’s planned 18th sanctions package.
The one area of unity may come in backing a strategy against China, including ensuring secure supply lines on critical minerals.
But Trump’s erratic handling of the conflict between Israel and Iran is likely to top a crowded agenda. The four European powers – Germany, France, the UK and Italy – will express their support for Israel’s right to defend itself, but in private calls to Trump have urged de-escalation.
Diplomats had hoped Iran could be persuaded to attend the Oman-mediated talks with the US on Sunday, but the talks – from which Europe had been excluded and which offered the only hope of preventing further missile exchanges – have been cancelled.
European leaders will seek an explanation about what persuaded Trump to give Israel a green light to strike Iran before talks involving his special envoy, Steve Witkoff, and Iran’s foreign minister, Abbas Araghchi, in Oman, had come to an end.
It is not clear that European powers agree with the US negotiating stance that Iran must abandon any right to enrich uranium, a break from the compromise agreed in the 2015 nuclear deal.
Iran deeply resents Europe’s lead role last week in ensuring it was censured by the board of the UN nuclear watchdog for failing to meet its nuclear safeguarding obligations. Iran believes the vote gifted Israel an excuse to launch its assault, so diverting the diplomatic path. Europe for its part said it had no option to press the vote due to the lack of Iranian cooperation with the UN nuclear inspectors.
With the diplomatic route currently closed, western leaders at the summit will instead collectively have to assess how close Israel is to permanently destroying Iran’s nuclear facilities, and the risk that the country’s reeling leadership will declare that the lesson of the war is that its security can only be protected by rushing to build a nuclear bomb. Demands for the leadership to take the fateful step are being openly voiced by demonstrators and by politicians.
Israel is trying to create the conditions for the regime to be overthrown but western diplomats report even internal critics of the brinkmanship over its nuclear programme are rallying to patriotic calls.
Writing in Foreign Affairs Richard Nephew, a Iran deputy special envoy in the Biden administration, said: “Iran’s most dangerous uranium enrichment site at Fordow has been attacked, but there is no confirmation that its defences have been breached or that its couple of thousand of centrifuges have been destroyed.
“There is also no indication that Israel has rendered unusable Iran’s stockpile of enriched uranium. If that stockpile is still available, and if Iran’s centrifuges are still around, Tehran may be able to reconstitute a nuclear weapons programme in just weeks.
“Iran could, for example, ship its hoard of 60% enriched uranium to Fordow (or a secret site) for further enrichment, quickly giving it enough uranium to make a bomb.
“But to actually build a nuclear weapon, Iran needs more than weapons-grade enriched uranium. It also needs processing equipment that can turn the uranium into metal, shape it into weapons components, and then build the weapon itself. Doing all that in the midst of war will be difficult, especially given the world’s decades’ long effort to deny Iran the necessary gear.”
“Mayday, mayday,” was the final radio message sent by the pilot of the Air India 171 flight bound for London, moments before it crashed to the ground, killing more than 270 people.
In a briefing by India’s aviation authorities on Saturday, authorities confirmed that Captain Sumeet Sabharwal, who was piloting the flight, sent a distress call to air traffic control less a minute after it took off from Ahmedabad airport at 1.39pm on Thursday.
When air traffic control responded to the pilot’s emergency mayday call, “there was no response”, said Samir Kumar Sinha, a secretary for India’s aviation ministry. He said the plane went down seconds later.
Sinha said that initial investigations showed the plane had reached a height of 650ft after takeoff, after which it began to descend rapidly and hit the ground in Meghani Nagar, 2km from Ahmedabad airport.
The 227-tonne plane crashed into a hostel where medical students and their families were living. All but one of the 242 people on board were killed in one of India’s worst aviation disasters in decades.
The collision with the hostel also killed at least four student doctors and one doctor’s wife who was heavily pregnant, as well as several labourers and vendors working in the area.
Indian aviation authorities would not be drawn into conjecture on the cause of the crash of the Boeing 787-8 Dreamliner, which has been the source of global speculation, but emphasised that “every theory going around about the crash will be looked at”.
Sinha said the flight data recorder, known as the black box, had been recovered and was being looked into by investigators. A complete assessment of the incident would be completed within three months.
Ram Mohan Naidu Kinjarapu, the civil aviation minister, told the press briefing: “The decoding of this black box is going to give in-depth insight into what would have actually happened during the process of the crash.”
A team of four UK aviation accident experts arrived in Ahmedabad, in the west Indian state of Gujarat, on Friday night to assist in the crash investigation.
By Saturday morning, the death toll had risen to at least 279, as investigators continued to comb through the wreckage and another body was recovered from beneath the wing of the plane. Families of the victims continued to gather at the Civil hospital in Ahmedabad where the dead were brought, as anger and frustration grew at the delay in handing over the bodies of their loved ones.
Anil Patel, who lost his son Harshit, 30, and daughter-in-law Pooja, 28, in the crash, was increasingly agitated at the delay. He was among hundreds of relatives who had submitted DNA samples to help identify his son’s body but said he had received no information since.
“We still don’t know exactly when we’ll get the body,” he said. He described his son and daughter-in-law as “all I had left” after his wife died of cancer six years ago. Harshit had moved to London two years ago but would video call his father every day.
“Even yesterday, when I was sitting outside the postmortem block, I could smell the stench of charred bodies from inside,” said Patel. “It’s hard to accept that my son is also lying in there. I just want to bring them home soon. The longer they stay there, the more they’ll deteriorate. I just can’t bear the thought.”
Rajnish Patel, additional medical superintendent at the hospital, confirmed that, more than 72 hours after the crash, only 11 DNA matches had been made identifying the dead and the remains of just three people had been handed back to their families.
Authorities emphasised that the task of identifying people, whose bodies may have been heavily charred or dismembered from the force of the crash, was a complex task, slowing down the process of returning the victims to their families. Officials warned families that they may get their relatives’ remains in a “kit” rather than a coffin as many were in such a fragmented condition.
“We are dealing with at least 250 samples, and for each match, we have to cross-verify it against this entire pool. It’s a process of elimination, and that naturally takes time,” said one official, speaking at the hospital, emphasising that the team at the hospital had been working through the night to accurately match the DNA to the bodies.
For those who were waiting for the remains of multiple family members who died in the crash, they feared the handover could take several more days.
The Syed family, including Javed Ali Syed, his wife, Mariam, and their two children, Zayn, five, and Amani, four, British citizens who lived in London and had been in Mumbai visiting family, were all among the dead. Javed’s distraught aunt and uncle had flown in from Mumbai to claim the bodies but said they had “no information from the hospital”.
Mariam’s family originate from Pakistan, and so far they had not been allowed to travel to India to provide a DNA sample to identify her. They also wanted her and the children’s bodies brought back to the UK when they were finally handed over.
“But we are worried, as we’ve been told the bodies are already badly deteriorated. If it takes even more days to get them to London, what will happen to them? How can we say goodbye in that state?” said Javed’s uncle Rafiq Ahmad.
The sole surviving passenger, Vishwash Kumar Ramesh, whose escape from death was widely described as a “miracle” by experts, remained in hospital in Ahmedabad under observation but was said to be recovering.
Dr Gameti, of Ahmedabad Civil hospital, said Ramesh was “doing very well and will be ready to be discharged anytime soon”.
Colleagues paid tribute to Melissa Hortman, the top Democratic lawmaker in the Minnesota state house of representatives who was killed on Saturday, with Governor Tim Walz saying the state “lost a dear leader and I lost the dearest of friends”.
Hortman was killed along with her husband, Mark, in what Democratic colleagues in the state described as an act of “targeted political violence”. Fellow lawmaker Josh Hoffman and his wife were also shot, reportedly by the same gunman, and are expected to survive.
The former speaker of the chamber, Hortman, 55, was serving her 11th consecutive term as a state legislator when she was assassinated, apparently by a man impersonating a police officer, at her home in Brooklyn Park, a suburb north-west of Minneapolis.
Hortman represented a reliably safe Democratic district in which she won re-election repeatedly by significant margins. She played a key role in passing recent legislation expanding abortion rights, legalizing marijuana for recreation, and requiring family and medical paid leave from employers.
After Democrats and Republicans won an equal number of seats in the House last year, Hortman led a boycott of the early weeks of the legislative session while the results of two seats were challenged. A Republican, Lisa Demuth, then took over as speaker.
Hortman was praised for her work ethic, negotiation skills and pragmatism. “She had a vision of what she wanted the state to be like, and she knew it was going to take a lot of work,” her former campaign manager Jerry Gale told the New York Times.
Gale said Hortman worried about her safety: “I think it did cross her mind at times on the campaign trail,” he said.
US senator for Minnesota Amy Klobuchar said she was heartbroken by the loss of her friend in a post on X.
“Melissa was a good friend and we started in politics at the same time and were always there for each other,” she said. “She was a true public servant to the core, dedicating her life to serving Minnesotans with integrity and compassion.
“Melissa’s legacy will endure, but today we grieve deeply,” Klobuchar added.
Hortman and her husband had two children, according to her state legislative biography. She entered politics after earning a degree in political science from Boston university; a law degree from Minnesota law school; and a master’s in public administration from the Kennedy school at Harvard. She also interned for former US senator Al Gore and served as a legislative correspondent for former senator John Kerry.
Walz was the first to say that Hortman and her husband had been targeted in what appeared to be a “politically motivated assassination”.
Ken Martin, the chair of the Democratic National Committee (DNC), said in a statement: “Speaker Hortman was a leader in every sense of the word – from ushering in free lunch for our kids, to protecting women’s rights and reproductive care, to standing up for Minnesota families.
“She led our state legislature with humor, grace, and determination to get things done for Minnesotans across the state.”
In the hours after Israel attacked Iran, food shipments and distribution in Gaza stopped and a French-Saudi summit meant to pave the way for wider recognition of a Palestinian state was postponed indefinitely.
International pressure over starvation and civilian killings in Gaza had apparently dissipated in little more than the time it took for the smoke of the first missile strikes to clear over Tehran.
Israel’s military moved fast to declare Iran its top priority, with the battle for Gaza relegated to second place. That shift was echoed in foreign ministries and newsrooms around the world.
“The fact that Israel attacked Iran doesn’t mean [the war in] Gaza ended. Today we had dozens of people killed, the only difference is this will have far less attention than yesterday,” said Xavier Abu Eid, a political scientist and former adviser to the Palestine Liberation Organisation.
“Israel’s message [with these attacks] is that there is no political solution for anything in the region. By striking Iran they want to sabotage the US-Iran negotiations as well as the international wave of support for concrete measures on Palestine.”
The decision by Israel’s prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, to take out the security threat posed by Iran’s nuclear programme had also defanged a significant diplomatic and economic threat to his government.
Some of Israel’s closest allies in Europe had become increasingly outspoken about both the impact of the war in Gaza on civilians, and escalating violence by Jewish settlers against Palestinians in the occupied West Bank.
Even historically strong alliances with countries such as the Netherlands and Germany had been faltering in the face of an 11-week siege of Gaza, UN warnings of a looming famine and repeated mass killings of hungry crowds trying to reach food distribution sites.
The EU last month announced a human rights review of its wide-ranging free trade deal with Israel, with findings originally expected at meeting of the bloc’s foreign affairs council later this month.
Its recommendations could pave the way for Europe to potentially leverage its considerable economic power as Israel’s biggest trade partner, accounting for more than 30% of imports and exports.
The UK, Canada, France and Norway this month imposed sanctions on two Israeli cabinet ministers “for their repeated incitement of violence against Palestinian civilians”, and warned other steps could follow.
The Franco-Saudi summit on a two-state solution raised expectations that major European nations were preparing to unilaterally recognise a Palestinian state. It alarmed Israel and its allies in the US so much that Washington issued a formal diplomatic warning against attending.
For now, at least, that sense of diplomatic momentum that might halt the war in Gaza has gone. Even governments that have become more openly critical of Netanyahu’s war in Gaza will be reluctant to press for its end while missiles from Tehran are killing people in Tel Aviv.
“Its regrettable that these attacks come at a time when there were interesting developments [on Palestine and the war in Gaza],” said one western diplomat.
Emmanuel Macron said the attacks on Iran should “in no way make us forget Gaza”, and told journalists that the summit was only delayed for pragmatic security reasons. It would go ahead as soon as possible, he said, but could not set a date.
In Gaza many people were oblivious to the war and all the diplomatic manoeuvring it had set off, because one of the longest communications outages of the war had plunged much of the territory into isolation.
Phone and internet networks were down from Wednesday because of damage to key fibre-optic cables, the UN said. “Since April, Israeli authorities have denied more than 20 requests to carry [urgent repair] work,” the UN aid coordination office said.
That meant they could not see new evacuation orders posted by Israel’s military spokesperson, or warnings that the war in Gaza would continue “with extreme force”.
They also could not access announcements from the Gaza Humanitarian Fund, the new US and Israeli backed organisation distributing some food in the strip from compounds guarded by the Israeli military.
“We were ordered to stand down,” the GHF said in a statement to international press. “We have asked the IDF to facilitate the ongoing delivery of aid as soon as possible.”
GHF uses only Facebook to communicate with Palestinians. So hungry, oblivious crowds approached centres on Saturday morning, as they had done since late May. Gunfire from Israeli soldiers killed at least 15 of them.
Israeli attacks killed at least seven other people overnight, local health authorities said. There had been a decline in airstrikes, as the Israeli military shifted its focus to Iran. But on Friday an Israeli military spokesperson warned that operations there would continue “with extreme force” and on Saturday new evacuation orders were issued.
“Famine worsens, the siege intensifies, and the dead are everywhere,” Al Jazeera journalist Anas al-Sharif wrote in a post on X, saying Gaza was “immersed in complete isolation from the world”.
As the members of the Catholic organisation wrapped up their speech with an appeal for forgiveness, the auditorium in Madrid exploded in rage. For decades, many in the audience had grappled with the scars left by their time in Catholic-run institutions; now they were on their feet chanting: “Truth, justice and reparations” and – laying bare their rejection of any apology – “Neither forget, nor forgive”.
It was an unprecedented response to an unprecedented moment in Spain, hinting at the deep fissures that linger over one of the longest-running and least-known institutions of Francisco Franco’s dictatorship: the Catholic-run centres that incarcerated thousands of women and girls as young as eight, subjecting them to barbaric punishments, forced labour and religious indoctrination.
The centres operated under the direction of the Women’s Protection Board, a state-run institution revived in 1941 and helmed by Franco’s wife, Carmen Polo. They aimed to rehabilitate “fallen women”, aged 15 to 25, as well as others deemed to be at risk of deviating from the narrow path marked out for women during the dictatorship.
Survivors, however, describe a reality that was far more brutal. “It was the greatest atrocity Spain has committed against women,” said Consuelo García del Cid, who was drugged by a doctor at her home in Barcelona and taken to a centre in Madrid at the age of 16.
In her case, her family had branded her rebellious after she attended rallies against the dictatorship. “In Franco’s Spain, a fallen woman could be anyone. If you were poor, an orphan, if your family faced hardship, if you were a bad student or wore a miniskirt or kissed your boyfriend in a cinema or danced too close – anything was enough.”
Many women were hauled into the centres in handcuffs after being singled out by priests, neighbours or relatives. Others were reported by state employees known as the “guardians of morality”, who patrolled the streets and venues such as movie theatres, swimming pools and gardens, calling the police any time they spotted a woman they believed to be in moral danger, said García del Cid, who has written five books on the centres.
“It was a covert prison system for minors,” she said. “You couldn’t go out, your mail was censored, visits were supervised by a nun. They had us working all the time, scrubbing and praying. We worked for free; sewing, embroidery, knitting, doll-making. We weren’t allowed to speak freely to each other, we couldn’t have friends. They were watching us all the time.”
The centres, which are believed to have held more than 40,000 young women and girls at their peak, were not closed until 1985 – 10 years after Franco’s death.
Amid pressure from survivors and after more than a year investigating their claims, Confer, a Catholic body representing more than 400 congregations, including many with ties to the centres, said it was ready to seek forgiveness for what had happened.
The ceremony, the first of its kind in Spain, got under way on Monday with the chair of Confer explaining that the organisation was ready to break its decades of silence over what had happened.
“We acknowledge this page in our history,” said Jesús Díaz Sariego. “This is an exercise in moral and historical responsibility, an opportunity to acknowledge what we did not do well in the past and express our empathy and deep sorrow to all these women.”
He contextualised the centres within the narrow norms of a dictatorship that had rolled back the rights of women, requiring them to obtain the permission of male guardians to work, travel or open a bank account. It was a “time of severe educational, social, political, and religious restrictions”, he said.
His remarks were followed by an audio compilation of survivors’ testimonies. Some spoke of wrestling with abuse by nuns when they were just eight or 11 years old, others told of punishments that ranged from rubbing nettles on the vulvas of those who wet the bed, to forcing people to eat their own vomit or draw crosses on the floor with their tongues.
“In the name of what God was this done?” one woman asked. “What kind of religious women could carry out such evil against children who had committed no crime?”
Most remembered the centres as places of beatings, verbal abuse, gnawing hunger and cold. Some spoke of the decades it had taken them to learn to live with their experience, while others hinted at those who had been consumed by the trauma and had turned to drugs or suicide.
Sign up to This is Europe
The most pressing stories and debates for Europeans – from identity to economics to the environment
after newsletter promotion
By the time the three members of Confer stood up to ask formally for forgiveness, emotions were high. As many survivors, flanked by their families and historical memory campaigners, began chanting, brandishing signs that read “No” and raising their voices as organisers tried to drown them out with music, Confer suspended the event.
Survivors were swift to explain their reaction. “It’s not a genuine apology,” said Dolores Gómez, who was sent to a centre at 13 after she told a psychiatrist her father was sexually abusing her. “This is just a facelift.”
The audio that had played during the ceremony had been edited to omit some claims, including those of women who said they had been pressured to give up their babies for adoption, said Gómez. “They’re not asking forgiveness for all that happened, they’re only asking forgiveness for the actions they are willing to recognise.”
After a few months at the centre, Gómez escaped, choosing to return home and risk her father’s abuse over the nuns’ treatment. At 15 she was sent back after her father raped her, leaving her pregnant. The following year, the nuns granted her father permission to take her out during the Easter holidays, allowing him to again rape and impregnate her. It took Gómez years to track down her children and start the painstaking process of building a relationship with them.
While Confer had been clear in asking the women for forgiveness, there was little sign they had delved into their own consciences and how they had allowed this to happen, said Paca Blanco, whose conservative family institutionalised her at 15 after she returned home from a party.
“They need to ask forgiveness of themselves first,” she said. “How do you apologise to teenage girls that you have tortured, mistreated, disrespected and exploited for labour? You’ve stolen their babies. How do you apologise for that?”
Some survivors, however, disagreed. “I would have liked if we could have made it to the end of the event,” said Mariaje López who was eight when she was sent to live with the nuns. “I think so many women needed to hear this apology to understand that the shame is on the other side. Particularly the tens of thousands of women who remain silent and ashamed over what happened.”
What was clear to everyone, however, was that Monday’s apology – accepted or not – was the tepid beginning of a much longer journey. “This is one step forward in the ongoing battle,” said García del Cid.
She had requested a meeting with Spain’s minister of justice, hoping to have survivors formally recognised as victims of the dictatorship and potentially paving the way for a response along the lines of Ireland’s 2013 apology and reparations for the abuses that took place in its Magdalene Laundries. In Spain, there has been little fallout from the role that church and state played in operating the centres; the congregations had never faced any kind of reckoning, with many of them continuing to receive public funding, said García del Cid.
Hovering over all of this was the question of just how these centres were able to continue operating after the death of Franco, leaving young women incarcerated even as Spain transitioned to a democracy. “They forgot about us, we didn’t matter,” said García del Cid. “They need to explain a lot to us. Democracy owes us 10 years of life.”
Despite the strikes earlier in the day, Sahar* and her family decided to take a stroll in one of Tehran’s parks on Friday night, the eve of Eid al-Ghadir, a major Shia holiday. But, instead of the usual festive fireworks, the sky was lit up by bright red anti-aircraft missiles streaking across the horizon.
“Seeing Iranian missiles over your heads worries you, you worry what’s going to come next. Will it be a war, destruction?” said Sahar over the phone. She sent a video to the Guardian that shows people in the park hurriedly packing up and looking up as the crack of anti-aircraft munitions rings out overhead.
Iranians are reeling as the country enters its second day of open war with Israel, the most intense exchange of fire in the two countries’ histories, with a level of violence not seen in Iran since its war with Iraq in the 1980s.
Fighting started when Israel launched hundreds of airstrikes across Iran on Friday morning, killing its country’s top military leadership and hitting its nuclear facilities. Iran quickly responded with a barrage of missiles and drones, sparking a cycle of retaliatory violence between the two countries.
In Iran, which has had much of its air defence systems crippled in the initial wave of Israeli airstrikes, the death toll continues to climb, with at least 138 people killed and more than 320 wounded. About 60 of the total, including 20 children, were killed in one Israeli attack on a housing complex in Tehran on Saturday, according to state media.
At least three people were killed and dozens wounded in Israel by Iranian strikes over the last two days.
The ferocity of Israel’s strikes and the apparent ease with which it has decapitated Iran’s military has left Iranians, who grew up with an image of a military and security apparatus that was supposedly impregnable, stunned.
In the first hours of Israel’s attacks on Friday, Iran’s military was caught flatfooted. Israeli jets flew across Iranian skies seemingly unchallenged, while drones reportedly planted weeks before sprung up from secret locations within the country itself.
“Israel’s attacks came as a shock, with high-profile killings and the destruction it brought, and the fact that Tehran was attacked,” said Amin*, a businessman from Sistan Baluchestan.
The sudden assault provoked confusion in the country.
Traffic on the capital’s city’s roads was light as people sheltered in their homes and bread lines grew long as people prepared themselves for further days of war. A resident of Tehran said that goods were in short supply at the shops and markets she visited as people stocked up on supplies.
Internet coverage was intermittent, and most of the people the Guardian spoke to struggled to send voice notes and messages.
“We are panicking. Today, I had a flight for Mashhad from Sistan Baluchestan and it was cancelled. I am in a state of limbo,” Amin said.
Iran’s supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, has threatened “severe punishment” in revenge for the attacks. The country has sent repeated waves of ballistic missiles and drones at Israel since Friday, some of which hit Tel Aviv.
Israel’s defence minister, Israel Katz, in turn, warned Khamenei that “Tehran will burn” if it continues its attacks against Israel.
There was a sense of satisfaction among some Iranians as they watched footage of missiles hitting Tel Aviv, and state TV played images on a loop. People in Tehran sat together watching jumbo screens, cheering as videos showed Iranian ballistic missiles targeting Israel.
“Many people are celebrating and happy for Iran’s retaliation to Israeli aggression and are asking that Israel be taught a lesson. People in Iran hate Israel as we know it’s a mad country ruining the region,” said Sahar.
Analysts said that Iran’s leadership had few good options in front of it as it decided what to do next in response to Israeli attacks. The network of proxies Iran had built across the Middle East to defend itself over the last four decades has been conspicuously silent since Friday, offering words of support but little more.
“Iran is alone – unlike Israel, it doesn’t have the back up of a superpower. But the problem is from Iran’s perspective they see this as an existential peril. I don’t think they see any exit ramps,” said Ali Vaez, the International Crisis Group’s Iran project director.
The US secretary of state, Marco Rubio, has said the US will support Israel in a military confrontation with Iran, and the US has warned Iran that there would be “dire consequences” if it or any of its proxies targeted US citizens or bases in the region.
Iran’s leadership does not only fear a military defeat by Israel, but also internal unrest if its security apparatus is shaken. The Iranian government’s popularity has waned in recent years and it faced nationwide protests in 2022 after the death of a woman arrested by police for not wearing a headscarf.
On Saturday, a separatist Kurdish party – the Council of the Free Life Party of Kurdistan (PJAK), which has clashed with the Iranian government, issued a statement calling for the people of Iran to mobilise against the Iranian government.
Iranian riot police were pre-emptively deployed in Tehran amid calls from some student groups for protests, three students told the Guardian.
“The regime is trying to do two things in parallel: it is trying to play on Iranian’s strong sense of nationalism … and it’s trying to crack down internally and make sure there is no space for any organised opposition,” Vaez said.
The Israeli attacks and the prospect of a wider war has had a rally-around-the-flag effect for some Iranians, even those who do not count themselves as nationalists.
“War brings destruction and that’s the last thing anyone wants. But it’s been imposed on Iran,” Amin said.
* Names have been changed
The Inter forward Mehdi Taremi will not be able to join his teammates at the Club World Cup in the United States as he is stuck in Tehran because of the escalating conflict between Iran and Israel.
Flights from all Iranian airports have been grounded after an exchange of military strikes between Iran and Israel over the past two days. That meant the Iran international was unable to take his scheduled flight on Saturday to join his teammates in Los Angeles.
Taremi will miss Inter’s opening match against Monterrey on Wednesday and Italian media said the 32-year-old will not feature in the other matches regardless of whether Iranian airspace reopens.
Taremi joined Inter from Porto last year. He made seven starts in Serie A this past season and came off the bench 19 times, scoring once for the runners-up. He made 12 appearances in their Champions League run, but was an unused substitute in the 5-0 defeat by Paris Saint-Germain in the final.
He scored for Iran in their 3-0 World Cup qualifying win against North Korea on Tuesday.
Early Saturday morning, Minnesota woke to the news of two targeted attacks on its lawmakers. A gunman killed the top Democratic state legislator, Melissa Hortman, and her husband, Mark, and injured another state legislator, John Hoffman, and his wife Yvette in the Minneapolis area.
The suspect, Vance Boelter, remains at large.
Here’s what we know about the violent incidents.
Amid rising threats of political violence in the US, Democratic governor Tim Walz was quick to identify the shootings as politically motivated. The fact that both targeted state politicians, and that police soon found a “manifesto” in the shooter’s car, seemed to support that definition.
The gunman targeted the two lawmakers in their homes in Brooklyn Park (Hortman) and Champlin (Hoffman).
Boelter, police say, impersonated a police officer to approach Hortman and Hoffman’s homes, where he shot the legislators and their spouses. Brooklyn Park’s police chief, Mark Bruley, said at a press conference that the suspect drove a vehicle that looked identical to an SUV police squad car.
The FBI is currently offering a $50,000 reward in the search for Boelter, who has not been seen since this morning.
Boelter was appointed by numerous Minnesota governors to the workforce development board, which is tasked with improving business development in the state. Hoffman also served on the board, though it is unclear if they knew each other.
Boelter is married, and runs a private security company with his wife, according to his LinkedIn page and the company website.
In documents, Boelter listed his political affiliation as “none or other”, according to the New York Times, and later as “no party preference”.
He had a list of around 70 other targets, including lawmakers such as US senator Tina Smith, a Democrat, as well as community leaders, doctors and Planned Parenthood sites.
His roommate and best friend David Carlson told media outlets that Boelter was a devout Christian and staunchly anti-abortion. He said Boelter texted him that he would be dead shortly. He claimed Boelter was a strong supporter of Donald Trump.
While some Minneapolis demonstrations were cancelled after the violent incidents, others continued and were well-attended, with signs showing support for Hortman and Hoffman.
Minnesota’s house of representatives was evenly split between Republicans and Democrats before Hortman died. Democrats have a one-vote majority in the state senate.
The Brooklyn Park police department lifted a shelter in place order on Saturday afternoon and said Boelter was no longer thought to be in the area. The hunt for him remains under way.
In the era of overtourism, every popular holiday destination has its tipping point.
For Sirmione, a sliver of land lapped by the blue-green waters of Lake Garda, that watershed moment came during Italy’s long May Day holiday weekend, and has led the medieval Italian village to introduce “street tutors” to manage the visitor flow and ensure good behaviour.
The village, considered a pearl in Lombardy’s lake district, was caught off-guard on 2 May when a crowd of people became jammed as they endeavoured to walk over its tiny stone bridge, which once served as a drawbridge, and into its warren of narrow lanes.
What should have been a pleasant day spent visiting Sirmione’s 14th-century castle or the villa where the legendary opera singer Maria Callas lived, followed perhaps by spaghetti alle vongole and an afternoon nap on a lake-side beach, quickly spiralled into sheer torment for the tourists and 200 or so year-round inhabitants.
There were queues of up to 40 minutes simply to walk across the bridge – a journey that would ordinarily take about 10 seconds – as pedestrians jostled with cars, many transporting well-heeled guests to their hotels.
Images and videos of the chaotic scenes were shared on social media, catapulting Sirmione, which already tops the list of Lake Garda’s most-visited locations, into the centre of Italy’s overtourism debate.
“The bridge was completely blocked,” said Cristina Fontana, who commutes by foot to her job at a newsagents. “I managed to get to work on time early in the morning, but it took me a while to get home. We survive off tourism, but this was an exceptional day.”
Luisa Lavelli, the mayor of Sirmione, said the bridge was soon de-congested and the mayhem eased, but with tempers flaring and criticism raining down on her council, she had to move swiftly to come up with solutions to prevent the village from buckling under the weight of its visitors.
Sirmione attracts an average 1.3 million tourists a year. That figure, however, does not include day-trippers. During the fraught May Day holiday, an estimated 45,000 more visited compared with the same period in 2024.
Lavelli’s administration thrashed out possible solutions to an increasingly challenging dilemma. They ruled out extreme measures, such as putting a cap on visitor numbers or following in the footsteps of Venice and imposing an access charge.
For the leaders of Sirmione, whose cherished high-profile repeat guests include the former British prime minister, Theresa May, the village and its visitors merited “the human touch”, Lavelli said.
So alongside the historic bridge being reserved only for two-lane foot traffic at the weekend during summer, a group of so-called street tutors has been dispatched to manage the flows.
Wearing yellow vests with the slogan “Keep calm and enjoy” written on the back, the tutors are also tasked with ensuring good manners are maintained, whether it be refraining from loitering for too long in one spot, sitting on the pavement and snacking or meandering the streets in swimwear.
“This year we are investing much more in resources, precisely because tourism, especially day-tripper tourism, is increasing a lot,” said Lavelli. “Therefore we need to be able to manage the pedestrian flows by introducing figures who can ensure both tourists and citizens respect the rules so we can all enjoy a better experience.”
On a recent hot and busy Sunday afternoon in Sirmione, the Guardian accompanied Claudia Pagani and Alfredo Pasquali, two of the street tutors, on their patrol.
The beady-eyed tutors steadily wove their way through the gelato-eating, selfie-taking crowds, as well as the odd hen party. Before long, they happened upon a couple perched on a pavement step while eating, and gently asked them to get up.
“It could have been worse; some sit on the edge of plant beds and accidentally trample on the flowers,” said Pasquali.
Most people are well-behaved, although the tutors know the real action occurs at the end of Sirmione’s main thoroughfare, usually late afternoon as bathers make their way back from the beach.
They stop a bare-chested teenage boy and a woman in a bikini top and ask them to cover up. The perplexed-looking tourists readily oblige.
“It’s always important to do this job with a smile; that way you get results,” said Pagani, adding that she enjoys being among people and sees the role as “a vocation”.
In the week since they started the job, Pasquali said he had only encountered one difficult visitor – a speeding e-scooter rider. “I told him to stop, but he fled,” said Pasquali. “I then chased after him and he stopped and apologised. You have to be kind, but determined.”
Several tourists ask them for directions, most often for the nearest toilet, even though giving directions is not part of the job.
Lugging suitcases, Hannah and Andrew Lough, a couple from Scotland who were in Lake Garda for a 25th wedding anniversary party, ask the way to their hotel.
“I totally approve of the tutors,” said Hannah. “Nowadays, many people have forgotten how to be respectful.”
But whether the strategy has a meaningful impact on Sirmione’s tourism challenges remains to be seen. Some residents are sceptical that there won’t be a repeat of that awful May Day holiday.
“I have worked here for 17 years and it wasn’t the first time the bridge got congested in that way,” said one local who asked to remain anonymous. “The main problem is the cars. They are mostly dropping wealthy people off at hotels because they don’t want to walk for 10 minutes. Cars should be totally banned from entering Sirmione.”
Fontana agrees that the vehicles are an issue, but said overtourism has now become something that is difficult to control. “We all want to travel and cheap flights enable this,” she said. “But having this possibility comes with pros and cons.”
Israel has claimed to have gained control of the skies over the Iranian capital and warned that “Tehran will burn” if more missiles are fired at its territory, but the Iranian leadership remained defiant, vowing a “more severe and powerful response” and threatened to widen the war by striking ships and bases of Israeli allies.
The mutual threats reflected the risks of a dramatic escalation in the conflict, as US-Iranian negotiations planned before the war in Oman were abandoned after Tehran said they would be “meaningless”, and Israel appeared to target Iran’s gas industry. Israeli rhetoric reflected its leaders’ growing confidence that they have gained the upper hand, and raised questions over whether Israeli war aims could go beyond the stated objective of crippling Iran’s nuclear programme.
The threat to destroy Tehran was delivered by Israel’s defence minister, Israel Katz, after Iran responded to the surprise Israeli attack on Friday morning with a barrage of several hundred ballistic missiles and drones, a small percentage of which succeeded in penetrating Israeli defences and killed three people in Tel Aviv and Rishon LeZion.
Katz, whose forces have already razed large parts of Gaza, held Iran’s supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, responsible for Tehran’s fate.
“The Iranian dictator is taking the citizens of Iran hostage, bringing about a reality in which they, and especially Tehran’s residents, will pay a heavy price for the flagrant harm inflicted upon Israel’s citizens,” Katz said. “If Khamenei continues to fire missiles at the Israeli home front, Tehran will burn.”
The Israel Defense Forces (IDF) targeted the air defences around the capital city on Saturday morning and became increasingly confident they had achieved complete air superiority and freedom of action.
“The aerial road to Tehran is effectively open,” an IDF official said. Later in the day, Benjamin Netanyahu said: “In the very near future, you will see Israeli air force jets over the skies of Tehran.”
Air force warplanes, the Israeli prime minister said, would target “any site and any target of the Ayatollah regime”, after dealing a “real blow” to Iran’s nuclear programme.
A few hours later, Iranian media reported a “massive explosion” at a refinery in the port city of Kangan, linked to the South Pars gas field, the world’s largest. The media reports said it had been struck by an Israeli drone, which would be the first attack on Iran’s oil and gas industry, a development with potentially huge economic and environmental consequences. The IDF did not immediately comment on the attack, and Iran’s oil ministry said the resulting fire had been extinguished by late evening.
Early on Sunday, both sides launched a fresh wave of attacks, with Israel saying that that it was attacking military targets in Tehran while Iranian missiles penetrated air defences in northern and central Israel.
Iran said the Shahran oil depot in Tehran was targeted in an Israeli attack but that the situation was under control, and that a fire had erupted after an Israeli attack on an oil refinery near the capital. Israeli strikes also targeted Iran’s defence ministry building in Tehran, causing minor damage, Iran’s Tasnim news agency said on Sunday.
In Israel, four people were killed in a missile strike near a house in Tamra, a predominantly Palestinian city in northern Israel. Israeli media reported another six people killed in Rehovot and Bat Yam in Tel Aviv. Scores of people were reportedly injured in the strikes.
Iranian leaders maintained a defiant front. The president, Masoud Pezeshkian, pledged that continued Israeli attacks would produce a “more severe and powerful response”, the new Revolutionary Guards commander vowed his forces would “open the gates of hell” on Israel, and Iranian state media quoted officials as warning the US, UK and France that their military bases and ships will be targeted if they helped shoot down Iran’s missiles and drones.
The US and France have already stated their readiness to defend Israel, and American media reports have suggested that US forces have already been in action. The UK government has said its forces had not provided any military assistance to Israel and the prime minister, Keir Starmer, has emphasised the need for de-escalation.
Following through on the threat would be an enormous gamble for Iran, drawing western forces further into the conflict when it is already reeling under the force of sustained Israeli bombing.
Speaking at a session of the UN security council on Friday, the US diplomat McCoy Pitt warned: “No government proxy or independent actor should target American citizens, American bases or other American infrastructure in the region. The consequences for Iran would be dire.”
At the same time, Israel’s air defences have shown themselves capable of minimising the danger posed by Iranian missiles and drones. The IDF said Iran had so far fired about 200 ballistic missiles at Israel and launched more than that number of drones but claimed the overwhelming majority had been intercepted.
The Iranian response has also been further blunted by Israel’s targeted killing of Tehran’s senior generals, almost completely wiping out the top echelons of the chain of the command. On Saturday, the IDF claimed to have killed two more: the head of intelligence for the armed forces, Gholam-Reza Marhabi, and the commander of the Revolutionary Guards’ ballistic missile arm, Mohammad Hossein Bagheri.
In total since the start of the war, the IDF said Israeli warplanes had attacked 150 targets inside Iran with hundreds of munitions.
Iranian state media said that a fighter jet hangar at Tehran’s Mehrabad airport had also been targeted. Iran’s state TV said about 60 people, including 20 children, had been killed in an attack on a housing complex in Tehran.
Iran’s envoy to the UN security council, Amir Saeid Iravani, said on Friday that 78 people had been killed in the Israeli attacks, and that more than 320 were injured, most of them civilians. Alongside Iran’s top generals there were nine nuclear scientists among the dead, as Tehran was caught unawares by the Israeli assault.
An IDF official described the targeted scientists as the “people who were main sources of knowledge, the main forces advancing the nuclear programme”.
The Iranian government also said there was limited damage at its uranium enrichment plant at Fordow, its second enrichment facility but Israel denied having bombed it. On Friday, the IDF claimed to have inflicted “significant damage” at the plant at Natanz. The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) confirmed the above-ground part of the Natanz plant had been destroyed but noted no apparent damage to its underground chambers.
An IAEA report said that attacks caused radiological and chemical contamination in the Natanz facility, but that it was manageable and there was no sign of higher radiation in the area around the plant. Iran also said there had been attacks on its nuclear site in Isfahan, which houses a uranium conversion plant, a fuel production unit and other facilities.
The IAEA reminded Israel that attacks on nuclear sites were illegal and contrary to the UN charter, with a potential to cause “radioactive releases with grave consequences”.
Israel’s justification for its attack on Iran was that the country was getting unacceptably close to acquiring a nuclear weapon, and specifically that it was working on weaponisation, the assembly of components into a warhead. That is a claim not found in US intelligence assessments or in IAEA reports.
An IDF official on Saturday gave more details of Israel’s allegation, claiming that Iranian technicians had been working on an explosive trigger mechanism for a nuclear bomb, and that part of that work was being done in Isfahan.
“We have seen clear intelligence indicating that they are taking steps forward rapidly, that cannot be understood in any other way than for a nuclear bomb,” the official said.
The worst casualties on Saturday from the incoming missiles were in the West Bank, where five Palestinians, including three children, were killed, according to the Palestinian Red Crescent, reportedly by a projectile fired by Houthi forces in Yemen, who are Iranian allies.
Over the first 24 hours of the conflict, three Israelis were also killed, two in Rishon LeZion and one in nearby Tel Aviv, with dozens injured and extensive damage to buildings.
There were reports from Gaza of the Israeli shooting of large numbers of Palestinians trying to reach food distribution points on Saturday morning, but details were hard to confirm on the third day of a communications blackout after the severing of a critical cable by Israeli forces.
The few missiles that pierced Israel’s defences caused significant damage but few fatalities. In Tel Aviv on Friday night, smoke from one impact site rose up in columns so thick they obscured the city skyline.
Israel’s ambulance service said 34 people were injured on Friday night in the Tel Aviv area, most with minor injuries. Police later said one person had died. Another two people were confirmed killed in a direct missile strike on central Israel on Saturday morning.
The Israeli leadership and the IDF have insisted that its offensive against Iran, called Rising Lion, would continue until Tehran’s nuclear programme – which Netanyahu said was on the brink of producing weapons – was comprehensively destroyed.
Addressing the UN security council, the IAEA director-general, Rafael Grossi, warned of the potentially disastrous consequences of such attacks.
The US role in the Israeli operation remained murky. In the run-up to the Israeli 200-plane attack, Donald Trump had publicly urged Israel to give diplomacy more of a chance before US-Iranian talks that were planned for Sunday. On Friday, the US president insisted he had been well informed of Israel’s plans and described the Israeli attack as “excellent”.
ABC quoted a “source familiar with the intelligence” as saying the US had provided “exquisite” intelligence and would help defend Israel as needed.
A man intentionally drove an SUV into a crowd of protesters in Culpepper, Virginia, on Saturday, striking at least one person, according to Washington DC’s Fox affiliate.
The man, identified by authorities as Joseph R Checklick Jr, was arrested and charged with reckless driving. Checklick was held without bail at the county jail, the news outlet said.
Authorities alleged that Checklick knowingly accelerated into a group of “No Kings” protest attendees. Organizers reportedly said that more than 600 attended the event, with 200 on Main Street and 400 along James Madison Highway.
As hundreds of thousands took to the streets to protest Trump’s military parade and his policies, violence has cast a shadow over demonstrations.
In San Francisco, a car hit at least four “No Kings” protesters in what authorities are investigating as a “possible intentional act”.
Texas authorities closed the state capitol grounds following a “credible threat” toward lawmakers planning to attend a protest.
Early Saturday, Minnesota state representative Melissa Hortman and her husband, Mark, were shot and killed. State senator John Hoffman and his wife, Yvette, were also shot, but are expected to survive.
Minnesota officials said the incidents appeared to be politically motivated attacks.
This blog has now closed. You can read our full report on the ‘“No Kings” demonstrations here and our report on Trump’s military parade here.
This blog has now closed. You can read our full report on the '“No Kings” demonstrations here and our report on Trump’s military parade here.
The Guardian’s live coverage of today’s protests is pausing for now. Here are the key events since noon:
Law enforcement agents in Los Angeles, Seattle, and Portland have deployed teargas against protesters at some demonstration sites.
There are multiple estimates for how many protesters demonstrated across the US today in “No Kings” gatherings and similar events. The American Civil Liberties Union provided a sizable approximation: more than 5m protesters, at 2100 events, nationwide.
Trump’s controversial military parade unfolded without incident, though it was pushed up due to weather concerns.
The manhunt continues for Vance Boelter, who stands accused of shooting two Minnesota lawmakers and their spouses, killing one legislator and her husband.
According to reports, Boelter’s writings suggest that he might have been targeting pro-choice lawmakers.
Federal agents in Portland, Oregon have deployed what appears to be tear gas outside an ICE facility where hundreds of protesters have gathered, according to the local CBS affiliate.
Some demonstrators “appeared to breach the door” of this building, KOIN 6 reports.
In Los Angeles, authorities reportedly deployed tear gas after declaring an “unlawful assembly” downtown.
CA: Happening now: Unlawful assembly declared at 2nd and Main in downtown Los Angeles—Tear gas deployed—Crowd ran down the road: pic.twitter.com/ujrPmG0ZEQ
Police use teargas against protesters in Los Angeles and Seattle:
The suspect accused of shooting two Minnesota lawmakers, killing one legislator and her husband, and gravely injuring the other politician and his wife, had a list of 70 potential targets, according to The New York Times.
Vance Boelter, 57, remains at large and is thought to still be in the Twin Cities area of Minnesota. Officials have been contacting the potential targets on this list.
Police reportedly said that this list was recovered in Boelter’s car, in addition to a manifesto. Those targeted on the list include politicians, physicians, Planned Parenthood locations, among others, per The Times.
One of Boelter’s friends reportedly said that he opposed abortion and supported Trump in the 2024 election.
There have been a wide array of attendance estimates for today’s nationwide protests against President Trump and his policies, but one civil rights organization puts the number in the millions.
The American Civil Liberties Union said in a statement Saturday night that there were more than 2100 protest events, with over 5m in attendance, at demonstrations across the US.
“Today’s protests are a resounding message that people across the nation will not be intimidated by President Trump’s fear tactics. Americans are brave, democracy loving people and will not sit idly by as the Trump administration feeds our Constitution into the shredder — nor will the ACLU,” Deirdre Schifeling, ACLU’s chief political & advocacy officer, said in a statement.
“In just five months, we have sued the administration dozens of times for their abuses of power, and we will continue to defend our rights. Protecting our democracy isn’t a partisan issue — it’s core to being American,” Schifeling said. “We will use every tool we can, from litigation to legislation to powerful protests in the streets, to stop the unconstitutional actions of this administration and protect our rights.”
More parade attendees spoke to The Guardian about what drew them to Trump’s military procession. One parade-goer told Tom Silverstone that they wanted to “witness what the energy is like here.”
Moments ago, Trump asked his wife, Melania, to join him at the podium.
Trump was just presented with an American flag flown over the US Capitol during the parade.
Chants of “USA! USA!” could be heard in the background.
Trump’s military procession has come to a close but festivities continue, now with an address from the president.
“We love you, we honor you, and we solute your noble service to our flag and our country,” Trump said.
“Today we commemorate an event that did not just change American history but changed the history of the entire world,” Trump said of the parade, which is taking place both on his birthday and the US Army’s 25oth Anniversary.
A once-peaceful demonstration in downtown Los Angeles reportedly descended into chaos Saturday afternoon.
According to the Associated Press:
Police on horseback charged at the crowd, striking some with wood rods and batons as they cleared the street in front of the federal building. Officers then fired teargas and crowd control projectiles at the large group, sending demonstrators, hotdog vendors and passing pedestrians fleeing through the street. Some have since regrouped, ignoring an LAPD dispersal order.
‘It was a total 100% over-reaction. We weren’t doing anything but standing around chanting peaceful protest,’ said Samantha Edgerton, a 37-year-old bartender.”
There have been several types of tanks along the military parade route. The presence of tanks on Washington DC’s roads has prompted concerns about road surfaces, as tanks are dramatically heavier than civilian vehicles.
“Much has been made of the fact that tanks and other sorts of armored vehicles are going down Constitution Avenue Northwest, which, like most Washington DC streets, is not designed to handle anything close to their weight,” the Guardian’s Chris Stein reports.
Stein didn’t see “any obvious damage to the roads” but did spot “the metal plates they put down in certain areas to protect the asphalt”
The Texas department of public safety warned state lawmakers and legislative staffers of “credible threats” to their safety, hours after two Minnesota politicians were targeted early on Saturday.
An alert was issued just before 1pm local time, alerting legislators planning to attend a “No Kings” anti-Trump rally at the capitol in Austin. The area was evacuated soon after, according to the Texas Tribune, which first obtained a copy of the warning.
The alert said the state capitol had been evacuated “out of an abundance of caution” after the DPS received a “credible threat” against state lawmakers. Both the capitol building and surrounding grounds were closed temporarily, and officials did not immediately indicate when they would be reopened.
“DPS continues working with our law enforcement partners to address the threat,” the statement said.
Later Saturday, spokesperson Ericka Miller said in a statement the department had arrested one person in connection with threats made to state lawmakers after a traffic stop in La Grange.
“A short time ago, a Trooper with the Texas Department of Public Safety (DPS) took one person into custody in connection with the threats made against state lawmakers who planned to attend today’s protest at the Texas State Capitol Complex,” Miller said.
DPS said there is no additional active threat.
That came after the state’s lieutenant governor, Dan Patrick, posted on social media that “a credible threat was made to possibly kill members of the Texas legislature at the capitol. “I urge everyone to take appropriate precautions and heed the warning of the Texas department of public safety until that threat is no longer active.”
Patrick noted the killings of the Minnesota Democratic state representative Melissa Hortman and her husband, saying that what happened “in Minnesota is a tragedy and our prayers go out to the families, friends, and those impacted”.
Saturday’s protest in Austin, which organizers have said will be nonviolent, is sponsored by the chair of the Texas house Democratic caucus, Gene Wu. The Democratic state representative John Bucy III, the Democratic state senator Sarah Eckhardt and the Democratic representative Greg Casar were expected to attend.
Republican representative Charlie Geren later told colleagues in an email that the Minnesota suspect – identified by police as Vance Boelter, 57 – had a list of potential targets.
“It seems to be an isolated incident. However, we’re always concerned about copycats and those who the attack might inspire,” Geren wrote. “Your safety is our top priority, and we are taking all necessary precautions to address any potential threats.”
Donald Trump finally got his wish to hold a military parade in Washington DC on Saturday, after thousands of soldiers accompanied by tanks, aircraft and helicopters marched through the National Mall in a celebration of the army’s 250th birthday, while across the country, millions of people protested against his administration.
It was the first military parade in the nation’s capital since 1991 – which celebrated the end of the Gulf war – and took place on the day Trump turned 79. The president had tried and failed to hold such an event during his first term, but made it happen just months into his second, albeit at what wound up being an especially tense moment for the country.
On Saturday, millions of protesters took to the streets of towns and cities nationwide to condemn the president in a wave of demonstrations dubbed “No Kings”. In Los Angeles, federalized national guard troops and US marines ordered there by Trump to protect immigration agents several days ago remained on the streets over the objection of local leaders, and again faced off with protesters.
And the day began with news that a Democratic state representative and her husband had been killed in Minnesota, in what the governor said “appears to be a politically motivated assassination”. Another Democratic state senator and his wife were shot, but both are expected to survive, while the assailant remains at large.
Within the heavily fortified National Mall on Saturday afternoon, there were scant signs of those brewing crises. The president arrived to cheers and chants of “We love Trump!”, taking a seat on a reviewing stand next to defense secretary Pete Hegseth and first lady Melania Trump. The event began 30 minutes late to avoid a downpour that never quite arrived.
When he spoke, Trump refrained from injecting the partisan politics and insults he does into just about every other speech, including when addressing army soldiers earlier this week. His tone was instead patriotic, with Trump saying: “Every other country celebrates their victories. It’s about time America did too. That’s what we’re doing tonight.”
While there was no shortage of the president’s faithful in the crowd of tens of thousands, also others were drawn out of curiosity, or to condemn Trump in what amounted to hostile territory.
“We’re supporting him and the military,” said Dan Funk, 68, who flew in from Nebraska to see their son-in-law march in the parade.
“Lot of patriots. Lots of people who are happy Trump’s in office. I love it,” said his wife, Deb Funk, 61. “We need some patriotism in our country. There’s too much garbage going on.”
Pat Douglas strolled down the National Mall in a desert camouflage tunic he wore during his 24 years in the army, on which he had pinned the purple heart and three bronze stars he was awarded for his service.
“It’s a good thing,” the 65-year-old said of the parade. “This is what brought us here. 250 years, it’s something that still needs to be defended and supported.” And while some Democrats have accused Trump of using the parade to celebrate his birthday, Douglas said, “This has got nothing to do with the president.”
Many others in the crowd came down just to enjoy the show, which featured the army’s Golden Knights parachute team landing on the White House lawn, an enlistment ceremony presided over by Trump and a fireworks display.
A Peruvian who was working in Washington DC said he came by to better understand American culture. Yassine Ahssini, a Moroccan who moved to the United States three-and-a-half years ago after being picked for a diversity visa, was drawn by the fact that no such parade had been held for 34 years.
“It’s just something you don’t see every day,” he said.
Yet it’s also an event that city leaders and residents, who are used to seeing their streets and monuments taken over for political events, only grudgingly welcomed. The federal district is strongly Democratic, and its non-voting delegate in the House of Representatives, Eleanor Holmes Norton, denounced the event on Friday, saying: “President Trump’s longstanding wish to waste millions of taxpayer dollars for a performative military parade in the style of authoritarian leaders is finally coming true on his birthday.”
Coming at a cost the army estimates to be between $25m and $45m, the parade’s preparations have caused the closure of busy roads for up to four days, while flights at Ronald Reagan Washington National airport were halted during the event.
City leaders expressed concerns that the tanks and armored vehicles will damage roads not designed for their weight, prompting the army to place metal plates on parts of the route, and outfit the equipment with rubber on their treads.
“No Kings” did not plan a protest in the city. But a different group called Refuse Fascism organized a protest earlier on Saturday that saw 300 people march to the White House, chanting: “Fascist America, we say no! Now’s the time for Trump to go!”.
“America does not do military parades like this,” said Chris Yeazel, a 40-year-old army veteran, who served in Iraq and took part in the march.
“Everything is just authoritarianism. He’s try to create chaos and become a dictator.”
Small groups of protesters came into the event, quietly sitting on the grass holding signs that read “No Kings”, or criticizing the money spent on the parade, while enduring sporadic insults from the crowd. Four high schoolers from Washington DC walked in wearing white undershirts that read “I ♥ USA” on the front, and “Fuck Trump” on the back.
As the crowd filtered out, one man spotted the group and said, “love the front, hate the back”, before handing them a sticker for the Proud Boys militia group.
“This is where we’re from, and we want to show that this isn’t okay for anyone to do, especially the president,” said Ethan Hettenback, 16.
“We need to show people that, like, no matter how many pro-Trump people come into this, there’s always going to be people who believe it’s not right.”
Today the US army will parade in style along the National Mall in Washington DC to celebrate its 250th anniversary. This also just happens to be the 79th birthday of President Donald J Trump. As commander-in-chief, he will take the salute from a viewing platform on Constitution Avenue.
But this is not a mere vanity project, as some critics have claimed. History really matters to the US’s 47th president. One of Trump’s last acts before reluctantly leaving the White House in January 2021 was to publish a report by his “1776 Commission”, created to “restore understanding of the greatness of the American Founding”. Deliberately, the commissioners included few university historians because universities were described as often being “hotbeds of anti-Americanism, libel, and censorship that combine to generate in students and in the broader culture at the very least disdain and at worst outright hatred for this country”.
The 1776 Commission demanded a return to truly “patriotic education”, declaring: “We must resolve to teach future generations of Americans an accurate history of our country so that we all learn and cherish our founding principles once again. We must renew the pride and gratitude we have for this incredible nation that we are blessed to call home.”
In this spirit, on 2 May this year, the president posted that he was renaming 8 May and 11 November respectively as “Victory Day for World War II and Victory Day for World War I” because “we won both Wars, nobody was close to us in terms of strength, bravery, or military brilliance”, and it was time for the US to “start celebrating our victories again!”
The parade on 14 June is also intended to raise the curtain on a spectacular nationwide celebration of the 250th anniversary of US independence, extending right across the country and culminating on 4 July 2026. According to the White House website, one feature will be a video history series that “tells the remarkable story of American Independence. It will highlight the stories of the crucial characters and events that resulted in a small rag-tag army defeating the mightiest empire in the world and establishing the greatest republic ever to exist.”
History on parade, indeed. As is often the case, Trump does start with a valid point. After he witnessed the extravaganza of Bastille Day in 2017, where French and American troops marched down the Champs-Élysées to celebrate the centenary of the US’s entry into the first world war, he was determined to stage a parade of his own. So what’s wrong with that? Shouldn’t countries be proud of their past?
OK (if you don’t mind the cost). But pride should be rooted in honesty, especially when Nato in Europe is engaged in a proxy war in Ukraine against Vladimir Putin, a systematic falsifier of history. And if we’re trying to be honest, world wars aren’t like the World Series with one country trumping all the others and winning almost single-handedly.
Take the second world war. On 3 May this year, former Russian president Dmitry Medvedev dismissed Trump’s claims as “pretentious nonsense”, asserting that “Victory Day is ours and it is 9 May. So it was, so it is, so it will always be!” Medvedev is now an obedient Putinist, but he and other Russians rightly point to their huge losses in 1941-45 – roughly 27 million people. Stated differently, in the three years from June 1941 to June 1944, between Hitler’s invasion of the Soviet Union and the D-day landings in Normandy, more than 90% of the German army’s battle casualties (killed, wounded, missing and prisoners) were inflicted by the Red Army. That puts Alamein and Tunis, Anzio and the liberation of Rome into a different perspective.
Yet Americans can rightly say that they were in a league of their own as a “superpower” – a word coined in 1944 to signify “great power and great mobility of power”. Their huge C-47 transport planes and the B-17 and B-24 bombers allowed the US to wage war right across the world. Their modern fleets of aircraft carriers, built to avenge Pearl Harbor, island-hopped across the Pacific to Japan itself. The Pacific war ended with the firebombing of Tokyo and the nuclear obliteration of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Or consider the speed of the remarkable breakout from Normandy that enabled allied armies to liberate Brussels on 3 September 1944, occupying positions they had not expected to reach until May 1945. When an astonished Winston Churchill asked how the GIs were being fed and supplied, US general Omar Bradley said he was running trucks up to the front “bumper to bumper, 24 hours a day”. Ford delivered the goods.
But Britain also played a crucial part in victory. Had our embattled island gone the same way as Scandinavia, France and the Low Countries in the summer of 1940, Hitler would have thrown all his resources against the Soviet Union, while Roosevelt’s US would probably have turned in on itself and concentrated on defending the western hemisphere. Instead, a combination of Churchillian leadership, modern fighters linked to the new Chain Home system of radar and the courage of the RAF pilots managed to keep Hitler at bay. Eventually, Britain became the essential supply base and launchpad for the liberation of Hitler’s Fortress Europe.
And so in 1944-45, the allied armies converged on Germany from east, west and south. Of course, it was an unholy alliance, animated by divergent aims and values. But the extermination of nazism was a goal all the allies shared.
With this in mind, let’s glance back to the US’s most important victory: independence. Yes, this was in large measure a David v Goliath story of “a small rag-tag army defeating the mightiest empire in the world”. The US’s independence was indeed testimony to George Washington’s leadership and his troops’ courage and resilience (reinforced by his insistence on inoculation against the smallpox epidemic). But this was also a world war as the British empire battled against its global foes. Crucially, by the 1780s Britain lost naval supremacy because (unusually) three rival seapowers had combined against it: France, Spain and the Dutch. It was blockade by the French fleet that forced Lord Cornwallis’s historic surrender at Yorktown in 1781 and British acceptance of American independence.
The purpose of historical research is to set events in context, not to boost national pride. The story of the US’s founding, like that of Hitler’s defeat, reminds us that allies matter – in the past, the present and the future. That should not be forgotten when history goes on parade.
Mirrors of Greatness by David Reynolds (HarperCollins Publishers, £12.99). To support the Guardian, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.
Authorities in San Antonio on Friday said at least 11 people had died in heavy storms and flooding – and that some remain missing.
Rescue crews were still searching for missing people following Thursday’s downpour as the flooding recedes, San Antonio fire department spokesperson Joe Arrington said.
More than a dozen totaled cars were found stuck and overturned in a creek after over 7in (18cm) of rainfall fell in parts of the nation’s seventh-largest city.
Three of the 11 confirmed dead were between 28 and 55, according to officials.
San Antonio officials said the search for the missing was focused on the creek.
The vehicles were likely quickly swept off the road by fast-rising waters and that more than 70 water rescues had been made across the city, officials said.
“Our hearts are with the families of those we’ve lost to this week’s flash floods and the families who continue searching for their loved ones,” Mayor Ron Nirenberg said.
Artificial intelligence seems to have touched every part of our lives. But can it help us manage our money? We put some common personal finance questions to the free version of ChatGPT, one of the most well-known AI chatbots, and asked for its help.
Then we gave the answers to some – human – experts and asked them what they thought.
We asked: I am 35 years old and want to ensure I have a comfortable retirement. I earn about £35,000 a year and have a workplace pension, in which I have saved £20,000. My employer contributes 4% of salary. I would like to retire at 60 and want to ensure I have enough in my pension pot to not worry about money later in life. Do I need to save more?
ChatGPT said*: A comfortable single-person retirement requires roughly £43,000 a year of spending (in today’s money) while a moderate lifestyle might need £31,000 a year. Covering £43,000 a year over a 20- to 30-year retirement implies a very large pension pot of about £793,000 in addition to the state pension. A moderate £31,000 a year needs £478,000 in savings.
Your state pension will kick in at 67 and is about £12,000 a year, much less than the £43,000 needed for comfort and it does not arrive until seven years after you retire. This “pre-state pension gap” could well exceed £150,000. You must plan to fund all expenses for seven years on your own savings.
Even optimistic growth leaves you well below the £500,000 to £800,000 needed. You’ll need to save more – much higher than 9%. Vanguard [an investment adviser] suggests saving 12% to 15% of your pay a year (including employer contributions). Legal & General offers a rule-of-thumb savings percentage of half your age: at 35, that means 17.5% of your salary. Since your employer already gives 4%, you might target 11%. Don’t forget UK tax relief: your 20% basic-rate relief effectively makes every £80 you save cost you only £60 net.
Consider topping up with a lump sum or contributing to a stocks and shares Isa.
Read ChatGPT’s full answer here
Steve Webb, a partner at the pension consultants LCP, says: Using the Pensions and Lifetime Savings Association (PLSA) standard for a “comfortable” and moderate income seems a reasonable place to start.
For someone aged 35 today, the state pension age by law will be 68 (and could be higher by the time they get there) so the reference to 67 in the reply is incorrect.
The PLSA says you need £43,000 a year after tax, so that implies a pre-tax income of very roughly £50,000; you get £12,000 a year of this from state pension age, but for the first eight years of retirement (before the state pension kicks in) you would need this to come from your pension pot. This means you will need £635,000 on current calculations.
The figure of £793,000, therefore, looks over the odds, though there may be an assumption (not made explicit) that a quarter is always taken in tax-free cash. The person using AI needs to understand what assumption has been made around tax-free cash to clarify what is going on.
It is good the AI explains that in the first years of retirement you are relying solely on your private pension pot, a kind of basic “cashflow modelling” many advisers would do as standard.
The rules of thumb are a decent starting point, although the one about saving at a percentage which is half your age is for people who only start saving at that age.
One omission is that there is no reference to the possibility of an additional employer match. Some firms will pay more if you pay more, and that would make additional workplace saving much more attractive than the suggested alternative of an Isa. Another omission is that if you buy an annuity at 60, you may want to think about things such as inflation protection, and these would increase the size of pot you needed to target.
I don’t think it’s a bad reply aside from the error on state pension age. But you would want to go deeper in terms of understanding the assumptions made.
We asked: We have 20 years left on our mortgage and our current rate is due to run out in a few months. The loan to value is about 50%. What are the best rates on the market? Should we go for a two-year or five-year fix? Or should we stay put and hope that that rates come down?
ChatGPT said: The very cheapest two‑year fixes are about 3.7% to 3.8% and five‑year fixes are about 3.8% to 3.9% for borrowers with large deposits. With 50% equity you should qualify for the lowest-rate tier.
For example, Lloyds Bank has a two‑year fix at 3.72%. These often have arrangement fees (typically £999) so factor them into any calculation. For five‑year fixes, Lloyds offers 3.78%.
If you did nothing, your mortgage would revert to the lender’s standard variable rate, which are typically much higher – about 7-8%. An SVR can jump if rates rise, and lenders are not required to pass on cuts in full.
If you expect further rate cuts, a two‑year deal lets you refinance again sooner at (hopefully) lower rates. The downside is more frequent remortgaging: after two years, you’ll need another deal.
Five-year deals are likely to be a few tenths higher but give peace of mind for longer and protect you if market rates jump or stay elevated. If stability of repayments is your priority, a five‑year fix is often recommended.
Most analysts expect further modest cuts – economists at Barclays predicted the bank rate could fall to 3.5% by early 2026. That could push mortgage offers down further, but likely not to the ultra-low levels seen pre-2020.
Many experts lean toward taking a fixed rate now (especially to avoid the very high SVR) and revisiting options after a year or two.
Read ChatGPT’s full answer here
David Hollingworth of the broker L&C Mortgages says: This response is not even close to the level of advice that a qualified adviser would provide. What it does provide is a quick spin around some of the things that have been going on in the market, along with a general overview of elements the borrower may want to think about.
The AI response is a bit of a mishmash and veers from quite specific information, such as specifying the Lloyds rate, to more general observations. Aside from the fact that this deal is now defunct, it also required the borrower to be a current account customer. Criteria will be as much a factor for many borrowers as the deal itself.
It does highlight that there’s an arrangement fee to factor in, but borrowers need to understand there are options that can reduce or remove those costs, which could work much better for someone with a smaller mortgage.
It feels a bit mixed about what may or may not happen with rates – the bottom line is that none of us know and, as far as I know, that includes AI.
Because it was asked about two- and five-year rates, it fails to consider whether another option could fit better. An adviser would take a borrower through that, which could open up something like a three-year deal, fixing for 10-plus years and the existence and pros and cons of variable rate deals, too.
The response may give some food for thought to borrowers and help them consider the questions they want to cover with a human adviser. Most borrowers will have had a browse online of “best buy” deals and coverage of what’s happening in the market before seeking individual advice. ChatGPT may offer another way to drag a very general summary together quickly as part of that research.
We asked: I have two children (12 and 15), both of whom are in secondary school. Both want to go to university when they finish school. What is the best way for me to start saving and how much will I need to put together? They will be going to university in the UK. Can they get student loans? How much will accommodation cost us?
ChatGPT started with details of the government loans for tuition and living costs and when they need to be repaid. It says these children would qualify for the minimum maintenance loan of between £3,907 and £6,853 depending on where they work and study.
It then said: It’s wise to start saving now with dedicated education savings. Junior Isas allow up to £9,000 a year for each child in tax-free savings or investments. Any growth is tax-free, and funds are released when the child turns 18.
Even small regular deposits (eg £50-£100/month) into a Jisa, or a high-interest children’s savings account, can add up. Other options include premium bonds, a stocks and shares Isa (higher risk, higher potential return), or simply a regular savings account in the parents’ name. Consider investments for long-term growth: index funds or diversified portfolios can beat savings rates, though with risk of loss.
It added that you should encourage children to save and to check for bursaries and scholarships.
Read ChatGPT’s full answer here
Charlene Young, a senior pensions and savings expert at AJ Bell, says: It did a decent job of spelling out the facts of how much uni could cost, and the probable level of loan that could be applied for.
It falls short on explaining the differences that would help someone make the right decision for their circumstances. A discussion with a real person would involve questions asking for extra information to give a more comprehensive answer.
When saving or investing for children, we often talk about putting on your own oxygen mask first, such as checking you have a cash buffer or emergency fund for those unexpected costs. I’d want to double check that you don’t have any unsecured, high-interest borrowing outstanding – the AI answer doesn’t really explain that, starting from an assumption your own finances are in good shape.
A pot such as a junior Isa makes sense for a specific goal such as university costs, but that money is locked away until the child turns 18 – and after that, it switches to an account in their own name that they can spend as they wish.
It was good to see the AI suggest involving the child in all financial discussions to help them become a bit self-sufficient and mitigate some of those risks, but the answer did not spell out the important access at age 18 point.
We know that investing gives the best chance of growing money over the long term – above cash and rises in the cost of living. But the short investment window between now and the time the eldest child would go to university was not mentioned at all as a risk.
A specific fund recommendation from AI would be a bit of a red flag, but it’s helpful to give people an idea of what could be considered or where to find more information. For example, what is an index fund, or a diversified portfolio and what are the likely costs.
Here, a real adviser could make a formal recommendation, or an expert could point out how to research different types of funds.
We asked: I have just bought my first home and am expecting a child with my partner. What types of insurance do we need and how much should we spend? We travel on holidays every year and both work full time.
ChatGPT gave a list of insurances and explained what each does, including what policies typically provide and exclude. For example, it said “life insurance pays a tax-free lump sum or regular payout if a policyholder dies during the term… A Which? comparison found a 30-year-old could insure £300,000 (25-year term) for about £113 per year.”
It said the key policies to get in this case were life insurance, income protection, critical illness cover, buildings insurance, contents insurance, and travel insurance.
It said: “To save on premiums, you can bundle cover as insurers often discount multi-policy customers. A joint life policy (pays on first death) is cheaper than two single life policies, but note it ends on first claim. Sometimes buying separate dual life (first-death) and second-death life insurance can be optimal. Rates vary widely so get multiple quotes.”
Read ChatGPT’s full answer here
Graeme Trudgill, chief executive of the British Insurance Brokers’ Association says the response is “very generic” and does not take into account the complexities of insurance. Brokers, he says, are able to negotiate with providers on behalf of the consumer and know what the best policies are on the market.
Kathryn Knowles from brokers Cura Insurance says some of the advice on critical illness cover was confused and did not properly distinguish it from income protection, which advisors have to do.
And Garry Nelson from AllClear Travel Insurance says the AI’s response on travel insurance is “very simplistic” and fails to help people in what they need, be it a single trip or annual policy. “This is as far as ChatGPT can go in my opinion for travel insurance enquiries – ie offering a general description as it is not regulated to offer anything more detailed or complex,” he says.
The responses from ChatGPT were largely limited to general summaries about the various topics – and sometimes even contained inaccuracies. They may be a useful introduction and guide, but lack the level of detail needed to make serious decisions that could cost thousands of pounds. It’s a good place to start if you want an idea of some of the things you need to think about before making decisions – but if you want advice, you should be better off with a human.
* The responses from ChatGPT have been edited for this article
What to ask and how
 You will get better detail in an answer if you provide a lot of information, such as your age, your salary and what debts you have, rather than just asking a general question.
 Check your privacy settings to ensure you are comfortable with how ChatGPT processes your data. You may well want to ensure your chats are not being used for training.
 Don’t rely on the AI to tell you about the most up-to-date products. Instead do your own research or go to an adviser. The AI is better placed to give plans or broad strategies.
 Use it as a jumping-off tool, not for a final plan. While you might get some good general details, don’t make any decisions without doing your own research as well or consulting an expert.
 If you don’t understand a term, ask the AI to break it down for you – for example, you might want to know what the difference is between types of loan available when you go to university.
 On the free version of ChatGPT, click “Run Deep Research” in the tools section of the query box to get a more extensive report on your query, as we did in collating this article. There are five opportunities to use it in the free version, and you can pay for more.
Marta Sottoriva, a teacher in Venice, has tirelessly campaigned for various causes in her cherished lagoon city, from railing against giant cruise ships to battling soaring rents. Now she is busy preparing banners, handing out flyers and shouting through megaphones in squares as she joins dozens of activists in whipping up resistance to the “umpteenth gigantic event” she says that risks turning the world heritage site – which has long suffered from the effects of excessive tourism – into a playground for the rich.
Sottoriva is referring to the star-studded nuptials between the billionaire Amazon founder, Jeff Bezos, and Lauren Sánchez, a former TV journalist. The days-long shindig, expected to begin from 24 June, will be the biggest wedding held in Venice since George Clooney married Amal Alamuddin in 2014.
While Venice residents mostly embraced the Clooneys’ fairytale big day, the Bezos wedding has been met with much more antipathy. As soon as Venice’s millionaire mayor, Luigi Brugnaro, confirmed in March that the couple would be getting married in the city, activists mobilised their “No space for Bezos” campaign.
Posters featuring an image of Bezos’s head on a rocket blasting into space – in reference to his Blue Origin space tourism venture – have appeared across the city. The campaigners have also been spreading the word by handing out flyers at various traditional Italian food festivals, known as sagre, and hosting public meetings. Their boldest pre-wedding stunt so far was to erect a banner reading “No Bezos” on the bell tower of San Giorgio basilica on the Venetian island of the same name, where the couple are rumoured to be exchanging their vows.
“There’s a lot of anger in the air because once again the council has enslaved itself to the logic of profit – our city has been sold to the highest bidder,” Sottoriva said. “Every time an event of this kind happens, the city comes to a standstill, certain areas become inaccessible and even more tourists arrive. This wedding really is the symbol of all that is wrong with Venice.”
The details of the nuptials are top secret, with Brugnaro’s council feeding the ire by not even confirming the precise dates. The festivities are scheduled for 24-26 June, although some say the wedding itself will not be held until 28 June.
Despite the scant information, for months the Italian press has been filled with hearsay about everything from the 200 guests – notably Kim Kardashian, Leonardo DiCaprio, Oprah Winfrey and Ivanka Trump – and their €9,000-a-night hotel rooms, to the contingent booking out the entire water taxi fleet and the many designer dresses the bride will wear during the celebrations.
While the city’s leaders are fully embracing the merriment and, moreover, the riches they claim the festivities – rumoured to be costing £8.4m – will bring to the city, their political rivals argue that the event will not benefit ordinary Venetians in the slightest.
“This wedding is causing much friction, especially because it is happening at a time when Venice, already invaded by uncontrolled tourism, is completely worn out,” said Giovanni Andrea Martini, a councillor for the opposition.
To make up for it, Martini would like Bezos, the world’s third-richest person, to help address the affordable housing shortage by donating money towards restoring the more than 1,000 council homes that lie abandoned.
Brugnaro has insisted the wedding will not bring any inconvenience to the city and has condemned the anti-Bezos campaigners as “shameful”.
Sottoriva says the issue is not necessarily the people getting married per se, although she admits that Bezos’s association with Donald Trump and Amazon’s record on workers’ rights does not bode well.
Sign up to Headlines Europe
A digest of the morning's main headlines from the Europe edition emailed direct to you every week day
after newsletter promotion
Simone Venturini, Venice’s councillor for tourism, said he struggled to grasp why anyone would consider a private event of this kind to be stressful or harmful for the city. “Venice has already hosted more complex and impactful events,” he said. “Is it perhaps a fault that Venice is the most beautiful city in the world?
“We should all be proud that the Bezos wedding, an event of international importance, is being held in the waters of our lagoon. Instead, the usual protest professionals have wasted no time. We want to reiterate that Venice is open to everyone.”
Marco Gasparinetti, another Venice councillor, said he could understand some of the angst but warned against believing everything the newspapers were writing. “This story about all the water taxis being booked out is not true,” he said.

The best public interest journalism relies on first-hand accounts from people in the know. 

If you have something to share on this subject you can contact us confidentially using the following methods.
Secure Messaging in the Guardian app
The Guardian app has a tool to send tips about stories. Messages are end to end encrypted and concealed within the routine activity that every Guardian mobile app performs. This prevents an observer from knowing that you are communicating with us at all, let alone what is being said.

If you don't already have the Guardian app, download it (iOS/Android) and go to the menu. Select 'Secure Messaging'. 
SecureDrop, instant messengers, email, telephone and post
See our guide at theguardian.com/tips for alternative methods and the pros and cons of each. 
Whether or not the wedding causes mayhem in the city all depends on where it is held, he added. “If, as they say, it’s on San Giorgio then this would not create any inconvenience – the island has already hosted big events such as the G7 in total security and so it is the perfect location.”
Regardless of the exact wedding venue, Sottoriva and her counterparts have no plans to tone down their campaign. “We’re planning a big demonstration on the day of the wedding,” she said. “Watch this space.”
The price of oil and gold has soared and stock markets have fallen after Israel’s strikes against targets in Iran.
The escalation of the conflict in the Middle East, the focal point of global oil production, prompted a sharp increase in wholesale prices. Brent crude surged by more than 7% after news of the attacks broke, briefly moving above $75 (£55) a barrel to its highest level since April.
Stocks fell on Wall Street, with the Dow Jones dropping 1.8%, the S&P 500 falling 1.1% and the Nasdaq down 1.3%. Airline stocks, including Delta, United and American declined on fears that fuel costs could climb if there were issues with oil supply.
News of the strikes affected the aviation industry as airlines cleared the airspace over the region, while investors turned to safe investment assets such as gold.
The British Airways owner, IAG, was the top faller on London’s FTSE 100, closing 3.7% down, and shares in the airline easyJet ended the day 2.7% lower.
One of the top risers on the UK blue-chip index was the weapons producer BAE Systems, up almost 3%, reflecting concerns that the Israel-Iran conflict could escalate. In the US, the share prices of military suppliers including Lockheed, Northrop Grumman and RTX all rose. The oil companies BP and Shell also gained value, with the former closing nearly 2% up and the latter closing just over 1% higher.
The price of gold was trading about 1% higher on Friday afternoon at $3,426 an ounce, close to the record high of $3,500 it hit in April.
“The geopolitical escalation adds another layer of uncertainty to already fragile sentiment,” said Charu Chanana, the chief investment strategist at Saxo. Stocks dived in Asia, with Japan’s Nikkei down 1.3%, South Korea’s Kospi falling 1.1% and Hong Kong’s Hang Seng dipping 0.8%.
In Europe, major markets across Germany, France, Italy and Spain all closed at least 1% down. In London, the FTSE 100 ended the day down 34 points at 8,850, 0.4% below Thursday’s record closing high.
Israel, which said its attack was a “pre-emptive strike” over Iran’s nuclear programme, has declared a state of emergency as its military said Tehran had launched 100 drones in retaliation.
Marco Rubio, the US secretary of state, called Israel’s strikes against Iran a “unilateral action” and said Washington was not involved.
The move to perceived safe haven assets has resulted in the yield on 10-year US Treasury notes falling to a one-month low of 4.31%.
Derren Nathan, the head of equity research at Hargreaves Lansdown, said: “It’s not just the outlook for Iranian exports that’s a concern but also the potential for disruption to shipping in the Persian Gulf’s strait of Hormuz, a key route for about 20% of global oil flows and an even higher proportion of liquified natural gas haulage.”
Much of the world’s oil, as well as key commodities such as grain, passes through busy sea lanes in the Middle East, including the strait of Hormuz.
Sign up to Business Today
Get set for the working day – we'll point you to all the business news and analysis you need every morning
after newsletter promotion
There are concerns in the maritime supply chain that continued conflict between Israel and Iran could lead to a de facto closure of the strait, which is considered a vital entry point for container ships calling at ports in the wider Gulf region.
All UK-flagged ships were advised on Friday to avoid sailing through the Red Sea and the Gulf of Aden, according to a document from the Department for Transport. The Greek shipping association has urged shipowners to provide details of vessels sailing through the strait.
“Any closure of the strait of Hormuz would see services rerouted, with increased reliance on Indian west coast ports for connecting the far east to the Indian subcontinent,” said Peter Sand of the shipping analytics company Xeneta. “The inevitable disruption and port congestion, as well as the potential for higher oil prices, would cause a spike in ocean freight container shipping rates.”
A large-scale return of container ships to the Red Sea now “seems less likely”, according to Sand. Attacks on vessels by Iran-backed Houthi rebels in Yemen 18 months ago led to many ships being diverted around the Cape of Good Hope, a rocky headland on the Atlantic coast of the Cape peninsula in South Africa, adding thousands of miles to journeys and pushing up shipping rates.
Energean, a UK gas producer, said on Friday it had temporarily suspended the production and activities of its facility off the coast of northern Israel.
Energean told investors it had received a notice from Israel’s ministry of energy and infrastructure ordering the suspension “following the recent geopolitical escalation in the region”.
Israelis were celebrating on Friday what many see as a stunning new success by their country’s foreign intelligence service, the Mossad.
Hours after launching 200 warplanes in a wave of strikes against Iran, Israeli officials released footage they said showed the Mossad agents deep inside Iran assembling missiles and explosive drones aimed at targets near Tehran.
According to unnamed security officials who briefed Israeli media, similar precision weapons were launched from trucks smuggled into the country and a “drone base” hidden somewhere near Tehran. This was established well in advance of Friday’s attack and used to destroy Iran’s air defences, the officials said.
The Mossad, an abbreviation of the Institute for Intelligence and Special Operations in Hebrew, has scored many such victories in almost 80 years of undercover operations, earning a unique reputation for audacious espionage, technological innovation and ruthless violence.
The new operation in Iran comes just 10 months after the service managed to sabotage thousands of pagers and walkie-talkies used by Hezbollah operatives in Lebanon, an attack that killed 37 people and injured about 3,000 others while crippling the militant Islamist organisation.
The service then contributed to the air offensive that wiped out Hezbollah’s leadership in a matter of days.
Over decades, the Mossad has built up deep networks of informants, agents and logistics in Iran. This has allowed a series of operations including the assassination with a remote-controlled automatic machine gun of a top Iranian nuclear scientist travelling at speed in a car on a remote road, the infection with malware of computers running key parts of Iran’s nuclear programme and the theft of an archive of nuclear documents. Last year, Ismail Haniyeh, the political leader of Hamas, was assassinated with a bomb placed in his favourite room in a government guesthouse in Tehran.
“This most recent operation is impressive, of course, but Iran has been an open book for Israeli intelligence for a decade or more,” said Yossi Melman, a veteran Israeli security reporter and author.
Melman said those pictured setting up missile launches in the grainy videos released by the Mossad were likely to be Iranians. “The boots on the ground inside Iran are not Israeli, so they have to be recruited, trained, equipped, and deployed. Then all the components of the weapons have to be smuggled in. It all needs a lot of professionalism and skill.”
Unusually, Israeli officials have highlighted the role of Aman, the military intelligence service, in building up targeting information for the Israeli offensive.
Though Aman and the Mossad often work closely, it is the foreign service, much smaller, that gets most of the attention. Even then, most of the Mossad’s work is never known outside tightly restricted circles.
For decades, few had even heard of the Mossad, which was formally established in 1949. Former agents were ordered not to tell even their family or their previous employment and the service never admitted its involvement in any operation.
Yossi Alpher, who took part in some of the service’s best-known operations in the 1970s, told the Guardian last year: “Everything the Mossad did was quiet, no one knew. It was a totally different era. The Mossad was just not mentioned. When I joined, you had to know someone to be brought in. Now, there is a website.”
The Mossad’s senior officials have long been more likely to spend their time on sensitive diplomatic missions, briefing senior Israeli decision-makers on regional political dynamics or building relationships abroad than recruiting spies or running operations such as that targeting Iran this week.
For decades, the Mossad oversaw years-long clandestine efforts to build up “enemies of Israel’s enemies”, such as Kurds in Iran, Iraq and Syria, and Christians in what is now South Sudan. As with many of its efforts, this had mixed success.
The Mossad is blamed by some for ignoring warnings about the reputation of Maronite Christian militia in Lebanon for brutality and ethnic hatred, and encouraging Israel’s disastrous invasion of that country in 1982, in which thousands of civilians were killed.
The Mossad also played a significant, though still little-known, role in the covert supply of arms to Ayatollah Khomeini’s Iran to help fight Saddam Hussein’s Iraq, as part of the Iran-Contra scandal during Ronald Reagan’s presidency.
The mythical reputation of the Mossad has been bolstered by films and TV series, with screenwriters attracted to some of the service’s best-known exploits.
One of the most famous is the 1960 capture in Argentina of Adolf Eichmann, a Nazi officer who was a key organiser of the Holocaust. Others include stealing warships from the French navy in 1969, warning of impending attack by Egypt and Syria in 1973 and providing key intelligence for the famous raid on Entebbe, Uganda, in 1976 that freed Jewish and Israeli passengers hijacked by Palestinian and German extremists.
In 1980, the service set up and ran a diving resort on Sudan’s Red Sea coast as a cover for the clandestine transport of thousands of members of Ethiopia’s Jewish community to Israel. The Mossad spies lived among tourists before being forced to close down the operation after five years.
After a deadly attack by Palestinian extremists on Israeli athletes at the Munich Olympics in 1972, the Mossad led a campaign to disrupt the networks and groups responsible. The effort ended when a Mossad team shot dead a Moroccan waiter in Norway in the mistaken belief he was a Palestinian Liberation Organization security official, and then made further errors leading to their arrest and trial by local authorities.

The best public interest journalism relies on first-hand accounts from people in the know. 

If you have something to share on this subject you can contact us confidentially using the following methods.
Secure Messaging in the Guardian app
The Guardian app has a tool to send tips about stories. Messages are end to end encrypted and concealed within the routine activity that every Guardian mobile app performs. This prevents an observer from knowing that you are communicating with us at all, let alone what is being said.

If you don't already have the Guardian app, download it (iOS/Android) and go to the menu. Select 'Secure Messaging'. 
SecureDrop, instant messengers, email, telephone and post
See our guide at theguardian.com/tips for alternative methods and the pros and cons of each. 
In 1997, an effort to kill Khaled Meshaal, a powerful Hamas leader, went badly wrong when the Mossad team was caught in Amman by local security forces. Israel was forced to hand over an antidote and relations with Jordan were badly damaged. In 2010, agents were caught on CCTV camera in Dubai during another assassination.
Then there is the failure to learn anything that might have warned of the Hamas raids into southern Israel on 7 October that killed 1,200 Israelis, mostly civilians, and led to the abduction of 251. The attack prompted the Israeli offensive in Gaza, the current war with Hezbollah and, indirectly, the new confrontation with Iran.
Former Mossad officials say the service only gets noticed when things go wrong. This is not quite true, though – as the release of the Iran videos shows.
Melman said one of the Mossad’s aims – particularly with the publicity – is to sow fear among Iranians. “The aim is psychological. The Mossad is telling the Iranian regime: we know everything about you, we can wander into your home when we like, we are an omnipotent force,” said Melman. “It’s also a very good way to boost the morale of the Israeli public.”
Explosions have been heard over Tel Aviv and Jerusalem and the Israeli military told the public to find shelter, as Iran launched a fresh wave of missiles.
 The IDF said it had identified that missiles had been recently launched from Iran. “You must enter the protected areas upon receiving the alert, and remain there until further notice. Exiting the protected area will only be possible after receiving explicit instructions,” it added. 
 This follows an earlier wave of missile attacks that struck a high-rise building in Tel Aviv. Police said one person died in the attacks, while Israel’s ambulance service said 34 people were injured.
Explosions were heard over Jerusalem and Tel Aviv early on Saturday as Iran launched fresh missile attacks. Three people were reported to have been killed, one in Tel Aviv in an attack on Friday night and two in central Israel on Saturday morning.
In Iran, fresh explosions were reported at an airport in Tehran that houses an air force base, and across the Hakimiyeh and Tehranpars neighbourhoods in the east of the capital. Iran’s envoy to the UN security council, Amir Saeid Iravani, said 78 people including senior officials had been killed in the Israeli attacks on Friday, and that more than 320 were injured, most of them civilians. He said the US was complicit in the attacks and accused Israel of seeking “to kill diplomacy, to sabotage negotiations and to drag the region into wider conflict”.
The US role in the attack remained murky with President Donald Trump giving conflicting accounts as to his approval and foreknowledge. In the run-up to the Israeli 200-plane attack, Trump had publicly urged Israel to give diplomacy more of a chance, before US-Iranian talks that were planned for Sunday. But on Friday, the US president insisted he had been well informed of Israel’s plans and described the Israeli attack as “excellent”.
A top-level UN conference on a two-state solution for Israel and the Palestinians scheduled for next week has been postponed, French president Emmanuel Macron said on Friday. France and Saudi Arabia had been due to co-chair the conference hosted by the UN general assembly in New York on 17-20 June, and Macron had been among leaders scheduled to attend.
Israel closed all checkpoints to the Israeli-occupied West Bank as the country attacked Iran, a military official said Friday. The move sealed off entry and exit to the territory, meaning that Palestinians could not leave without special coordination.
This live blog is now ending. You can follow our continued coverage here.
Israel’s paramedic service says two people are confirmed to have been killed following an earlier missile strike in central Israel. A further 19 were injured.
In total, three people have been killed since missile strikes against Israel began on Friday.
One person was killed and 19 injured in the recent wave of missile attacks in central Israel, according to a spokesperson for Magen David Adom rescue service cited by local media. Three of the injured are in a serious condition, the spokesperson said.
Iran said dialogue with the US over Tehran’s nuclear programme is “meaningless” after Israel’s biggest-ever military strike against its longstanding enemy and accused Washington of supporting the attack, reports Reuters. 
 “The other side [the US] acted in a way that makes dialogue meaningless. You cannot claim to negotiate and at the same time divide work by allowing the Zionist regime [Israel] to target Iran’s territory,” the semi-official Tasnim news agency quoted foreign ministry spokesperson Esmaeil Baghaei as saying. 
 He said Israel “succeeded in influencing” the diplomatic process and the Israeli attack would not have happened without Washington’s permission. 
 Iran earlier accused the US of being complicit in Israel’s attacks, but Washington denied the allegation and told Tehran at the United Nations Security Council that it would be “wise” to negotiate over its nuclear programme. 
 The sixth round of US-Iran nuclear talks was set to be held on Sunday in Muscat, but it was unclear whether it would go ahead after the Israeli strikes.
The Israel Defence Force told the public it is now possible to leave protected areas, but that they should remain nearby until further notice.
Emergency responders say they are treating 10 people who sustained injuries in the latest missile attacks, adding that they are in a mild to moderate condition. Magen David Adom rescue service said these figures were based on initial reports and that its teams continue to scan affected areas.
Footage from the Iranian ballistic missile impact in central Israel. Medics say they're treating at least 10 wounded. pic.twitter.com/iZtMAh8IlD
Explosions have been heard over Tel Aviv and Jerusalem and the Israeli military told the public to find shelter, as Iran launched a fresh wave of missiles.
 The IDF said it had identified that missiles had been recently launched from Iran. “You must enter the protected areas upon receiving the alert, and remain there until further notice. Exiting the protected area will only be possible after receiving explicit instructions,” it added. 
 This follows an earlier wave of missile attacks that struck a high-rise building in Tel Aviv. Police said one person died in the attacks, while Israel’s ambulance service said 34 people were injured.
China condemns Israel’s violations of Iran’s sovereignty, security and territorial integrity and urges Israel to immediately stop all risky military actions, China’s UN Ambassador Fu Cong has said, according to a report by state-run Xinhua News Agency.
 Fu added that China opposes the expansion of conflicts and is deeply concerned about the consequences that may be brought about by Israel’s actions.
Sirens are sounding across northern Israel, according to local media.
 Israel Defense Forces said in a statement that alerts had been activated in several areas of the country after it identified missiles being launched from Iran. “At this time, the Air Force is working to intercept and attack wherever necessary to eliminate the threat,” it said.
A top-level UN conference on a two-state solution for Israel and the Palestinians scheduled for next week has been postponed amid surging tensions in the Middle East, French President Emmanuel Macron said on Friday. Associated Press reports:
France and Saudi Arabia were due to co-chair the conference hosted by the UN General Assembly in New York on June 17-20, and Macron had been among leaders scheduled to attend. The Palestinian Authority hoped the conference would revive the long-defunct peace process.
  Macron expressed his “determination to recognize the state of Palestine” at some point, despite the postponement. France has pushed for a broader movement toward recognizing a Palestinian state in parallel with recognition of Israel and its right to defend itself.
  After Israel’s strikes on Iran on Friday, Macron said that France’s military forces around the Middle East are ready to help protect partners in the region, including Israel, but wouldn’t take part in any attacks on Iran.
  Macron told reporters that the two-state conference was postponed for logistical and security reasons, and because some Palestinian representatives couldn’t come to the event. He insisted that it would be held “as soon as possible” and that he was in discussion with Saudi Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman about a new date.
  The UN ambassadors from France and Saudi Arabia said in a letter to the 193 UN member nations that the delay is “due to the current circumstances in the Middle East that prevent regional leaders from attending the conference in New York.”
Canadian prime minister Mark Carney said he had convened the National Security Council to ensure that “all necessary steps” will be taken to protect Canadian nationals amid the escalation in the Middle East.
In a statement on X, he said:
Iran’s nuclear program has long been a cause of grave concern, and its missile attacks across Israel threaten regional peace. 
  Today, I convened our National Security Council to receive an update on the situation and to ensure that all necessary steps will be taken to protect our nationals and our diplomatic missions in the region. 
  Canada reaffirms Israel’s right to defend itself and to ensure its security. We call on all parties to exercise maximum restraint and move towards a diplomatic resolution.
Iran’s Tasnim News Agency has reported that several loud explosions have been heard in the Hakimiyeh and Tehranpars neighbourhoods in eastern Tehran.
 This follows earlier reports that two projectiles hit the Mehrabad airport area in the Iranian capital.
The president of the European Commission, Ursula von der Leyen, said she had spoken with Israeli President Isaac Herzog about the escalating situation in the Middle East. she wrote in an update on X:
I reiterated Israel’s right to defend itself and protect its people. At the same time, preserving regional stability is vital. I urge all parties to act with maximum restraint and work to de-escalate the situation. Diplomatic efforts are crucial to preventing further escalation.
The sea, the great unifier, is man’s only hope … and we are all in the same boat.” So said Jacques Cousteau, the French explorer, oceanographer and pioneering film-maker, who notably pivoted from merely sharing his underwater world to sounding the alarm over its destruction.
Half a century later, David Attenborough, a year shy of his 100th birthday, followed Cousteau’s trajectory. In the naturalist’s acclaimed new film, Ocean, which highlights the destructive fishing practice of bottom trawling, he says he has come to the realisation that the “most important place on Earth is not on land but at sea”.
This message, backed by undeniable indicators of poor ocean health, has boosted calls for more ocean governance and protection. The mood at this week’s UN ocean summit in Nice, which ended on Friday, was that if ever there was a defining “moment” for the ocean, it was happening here, in France’s Côte d’Azur.
But there was also a sense of this sentiment being shared in the wider world, where, partly thanks to the summit, many are finally waking up the reality of the serious decline of something that makes up more than 70% of the Earth’s surface.
By the end of the first day, on the roof of the conference centre overlooking the Mediterranean, Emmanuel Macron, the French president and co-host, declared the summit a success. “Never before have so many heads of state and governments met to discuss the seas,” he said, citing the figure of 60 world leaders, three times as many as attended the second UN ocean conference in Lisbon in 2022. About 190 ministers were also in Nice. The US did not attend.
But what, with the eyes of the watching world, was actually achieved for the future health of oceans?
The most important accomplishment was that enough countries either ratified or formally committed to ratifying the high seas treaty. Once ratified, this agreement will help achieve an agreed global target of protecting 30% of the world’s seas by 2030. It will provide the first legal mechanism for the creation of protected areas in the high seas, international waters that cover almost two-thirds of the ocean.
The treaty is expected to now come into force by 1 January 2026, said Macron. This alone is an achievement: the early stages of the high seas treaty took 20 years of negotiations before agreement was reached in 2023. Now it could be months away from becoming a reality.
António Guterres, the UN secretary general, called the pace of progress “a record”. “I see a momentum and an enthusiasm that was difficult to find in the past,” he said.
The summit does not carry the weight of a climate Cop, the annual UN climate change conference where governments and other stakeholders gather to discuss and negotiate on climate action, nor is it legally binding. But it has come at a critical moment for threats facing the seas.
In April, Donald Trump made a move to fast-track deep-sea mining under US law, sidestepping international efforts to regulate the industry. The conference saw four new countries – now 37 – joining France in calling for a moratorium, pause or ban on deep-sea mining, amid warnings of “irreversible” damage to ecosystems should it go ahead.
Trump’s actions, which were criticised by China, which also wants to mine, have had the effect of “strengthening people’s commitment to multilateralism” and building alliances at a key moment, says John Hocevar, oceans campaign director at Greenpeace USA. “In July, the International Seabed Authority meets to discuss, hopefully, a moratorium on deep-sea mining.”
More than 90 ministers issued a symbolic statement in Nice reaffirming their support for the strongest possible plastics treaty, to be negotiated when talks resume in August.
Rémy Rioux, a former French negotiator on climate finance at the 2015 Paris agreement, and director general of AFD, France’s development bank, says that Macron has adopted similar diplomacy at the ocean summit that made Cop21 a success.
“There was significant numbers of heads of state in the room, which represents something,” Rioux says. “I’m proud that France has provided a voice to those who are not heard.”
But, in terms of finance, we “are still way behind what the UN say is needed”.
Pacific nations, who contribute least and stand to suffer most from the effects of the climate crisis, sea level rise and ocean pollution, welcomed the chance to talk to Macron. But they were quick to remind larger, more polluting nations that they needed to do more.
Moetai Brotherson, the president of French Polynesia, announced the creation of the largest protected marine area in the world. It will cover 5m sq kilometres, the nation’s entire exclusive economic zone and will restrict destructive activities such as bottom trawling and deep-sea mining. A fifth will be designated a highly or fully protected area, where only traditional Tahitian boats, ecotourism and scientific exploration are allowed.
“By doing what we are doing, it will put pressure on other countries, including France, to do more,” he says. “Turning this area into a marine protected area is one thing. Ensuring that laws are not broken is another. The responsibility of big nations is not to come and lecture us, but to help us.”
Ralph Regenvanu, Vanuatu’s environment minister, says: “The Pacific island states have banned bottom trawling in their national jurisdictions – and so we are calling on all nations to do the same. The EU is full of countries that are still doing this.”
At the start of the conference, the French president found himself under fire for failing to ban bottom trawling in protected marine areas. France announced that instead it would “limit” the practice and seek to protect 4% of its metropolitan waters.
One of the strongest critics of France’s role in the summit, was the granddaughter of Jacques Cousteau. France “over-compromised and under-delivered”, she says.
“This was the moment for France to lead – and they missed it,” says Alexandra Cousteau, also an adviser to international oceans organisation, Oceana. “President Macron promised action on bottom trawling in marine protected areas but delivered only artificial limits and empty words. That’s not leadership – that’s evasion.”
Despite its achievements, the summit highlighted how much is yet to be done. A study by National Geographic Pristine Seas and Dynamic Planet found, for example, that in order to meet the global target of 30x30, 85 new marine protected areas would need to be created daily. So far, less than 3% of the ocean is given this extra protection.
Yet, overall the mood was high, boosted by a surge of enthusiasm for protecting the world’s seas.
“I hate to say it out loud, but it has been better than I expected,” says Hocevar. “The ocean is having a moment and this was the best opportunity to demonstrate momentum.”
At midnight on Friday Sveta’s four-year-old daughter was asleep on the floor outside their shattered apartment block, as the rest of the family weighed up where they should spend the night.
A missile from the first Iranian salvo fired at Tel Aviv had landed a couple of blocks away, killing at least one person, injuring at least 16 others and damaging hundreds of shops and homes in this quiet residential area.
The 37-year-old was sanguine about her own losses, and backed the government decision to attack Iran even though it had so quickly cost her family their home.
“I support it completely,” she said as her older daughter stroked their chihuahua. “This is nothing compared to what they will be able to do if they get their hand on the A-bomb [nuclear weapons]. We can’t afford for the Iranians to get them.
“We tell [our daughters] that as long as we go to the shelter together, everything is OK. The damage in the house is just material things.”
The family’s street, in a residential area of Ramat Gan town east of Tel Aviv, was busy with emergency services crunching over shattered glass and other wreckage to reach the building that took a direct hit.
It had been reduced to layers of concrete rubble and twisted steel, with an apparently undamaged cabinet hanging incongruously from the remains of the first floor.
Two hours after the explosion, rescue teams were still searching through the wreckage for survivors, as a drone buzzed overhead when the sirens wailed again.
Iran launched more than 150 missiles at Israeli in five waves overnight, and though most were intercepted, about 10 got through air defences, a military spokesperson said. Those strikes killed three people in the Tel Aviv area and injured more than 70 others around the country.
It was the bloodiest few hours inside Israel since the start of the war in Gaza in October 2023, but the toll was dwarfed by the damage that Israel inflicted on Iran.
Yaniv Nimni’s home lost its roof and all its windows in the last barrage just before dawn, when one of the missiles landed in his suburban street in the town of Rishon LeZion, just south of Tel Aviv.
“This is only money, as long as the family are OK, that’s what matters,” he said as he surveyed the damage. His only question about the government’s decision to hit Iran was why they left it so long. “It should have been done much earlier,” he said.
Israelis who have become used to occasional strikes from smaller, short-range rockets from Gaza or Lebanon were stunned by the destruction.
For saving lives, the country’s shelter network worked. The three people killed in Ramat Gan and Rishon LeZion had been outside protected areas when the missiles struck, authorities said.
The two-storey houses next to Nimni’s were stripped back to raw concrete and piles of rubble, their ceilings collapsed, furnishings shredded. Trees in their gardens were snapped to the ground and cars crumpled on the street outside.
At the edge of the police cordon in Ramat Gan, Bar, 31, begged to be allowed back into her building for just a few minutes to pick up a few things for her children.
The family escaped the bombing because they were staying with her parents. Bar realised they’d had a narrow escape when she recognised her home on the news and, after the all-clear, came back to try to check on their apartment.
“They told me I can’t go in because of the damage,” she said. “I’m anxious and in shock, and the kids are very scared. We have nowhere to go, no home to go back to.”
Residents of nearby buildings walked past dragging suitcases and weighed down with backpacks. Most were leaving to stay with friends and relatives, because the city government had declared a mass casualty event and was only offering camp beds in a nearby school.
A few hundred metres down the road Orly, 27, was helping a friend sweep up shattered glass from the window of a friend’s beauty salon.
“You see what a ballistic missile does? We are hundreds of metres away here,” she said. “We were in the shelter when it hit and you felt it. I’ve been through a couple of wars now and I knew this was different.”
Elia Digma, 18, lives near a high-rise residential building in central Tel Aviv that was hit in the first salvo and had come to inspect the damage. “It’s a miracle only five people were hurt here,” he said. “It was one hell of a boom, and everything shook.”
Shocked by the destruction and braced for more attacks, he too was still confident that a pre-emptive attack on Iran had been necessary.
“We are doing what we need to defend ourselves,” Elia said. “The Bible says if someone comes to kill you, you must kill them first. We are ready for anything and everything that will bring quiet.”
Iranian missiles have rained down on Tel Aviv in retaliation for Friday morning’s surprise aerial assault by Israel, as Tehran vowed to open the “gates of hell”, while fresh explosions were heard in the Iranian capital early on Saturday.
Benjamin Netanyahu threatened that “more is on the way” and said Israel’s attempt to destroy Iran’s nuclear programme was just beginning.
Iran and Israel began reporting a new wave of Iranian missile attacks that continued into early Saturday, with explosions heard over Jerusalem and Tel Aviv. In northern Tehran, residents reported fresh explosions as Iran’s state news agency, IRNA, said Israel had launched further strikes.
The Fars news agency said two projectiles had hit Tehran’s Mehrabad airport, and Iranian media said flames were reported there. Close to key Iranian leadership sites, the airport hosts an air force base with fighter jets and transport aircraft.
An Israeli military spokesperson said earlier that Iran had fired up to 100 missiles in waves earlier in the evening, and that most had been intercepted or missed their intended target, but several appeared to penetrate Israel’s multi-tiered defences.
At about 9pm in Tel Aviv, sirens sounded and phones buzzed with urgent alerts. Half an hour later the city echoed with the mid-air explosions of the Arrow missile defence systems taking out some of the Iranian arsenal, debris smashing into the ground and the blasts of several Iranian warheads that struck their targets.
Smoke from one impact site rose up in columns so thick they obscured the city skyline including nearby skyscrapers, as bright fragments of intercepted missiles arced above. One missile hit a high-rise residential building near the heart of Tel Aviv, shattering windows down most of the facade, and reducing the worst-hit areas to a tangle of exposed, twisted steel bars.
On the ground floor, fire fighters picked their way through the rubble beside the crumpled remains of a car caught in the blast, a report on Israeli TV showed.
Israel’s ambulance service said 34 people were injured on Friday night in the Tel Aviv area, most with minor injuries. Police later said one person had died. Another two people were confirmed killed in a direct missile strike on central Israel on Saturday morning.
The barrage began after a televised address from Iran’s supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, who pledged: “The armed forces of the Islamic republic will inflict heavy blows upon this malevolent enemy.” He warned the consequences of Israel’s attack “will bring it to ruin”.
Earlier, the new head of the Revolutionary Guards, Mohammad Pakpour – hastily appointed after his predecessor was killed in Israel’s attack – threatened to open “the gates of hell” in retaliation, as the Middle East faced the prospect of a full-scale war of uncertain duration.
Israel’s defence minister, Israel Katz, accused Iran of crossing “red lines” by attacking civilian areas, although some of Israel’s own strikes earlier in the day hit residential parts of Iranian cities.
“We will continue to defend the citizens of Israel and ensure that the Ayatollah regime pays a very heavy price for its heinous actions,” Katz said.
The Israeli pre-dawn strikes on Friday hit more than 100 targets in Iran, including nuclear facilities and missile sites, and killed senior military commanders and scientists in what Tehran said was a “declaration of war”.
Iran’s envoy to the UN security council, Amir Saeid Iravani, said 78 people including senior officials had been killed in the Israeli attacks, and that more than 320 were injured, most of them civilians.
In a video statement on Friday night, Netanyahu said: “In the past 24 hours, we have taken out top military commanders, senior nuclear scientists, the Islamic regime’s most significant enrichment facility and a large portion of its ballistic missile arsenal. More is on the way. The regime does not know what hit them, or what will hit them. It has never been weaker.”
More explosions were reported in Iran on Friday evening and early on Saturday, suggesting a secondary phase of Israeli attacks was already under way, in the early stages of a war that has been brewing for a quarter of a century, ever since Iran’s secret underground uranium enrichment facilities were first exposed, and the US and Israel insisted the country would not be allowed to build a bomb.
The focus of much of the Israeli munitions on Friday was the mostly subterranean uranium enrichment plant at Natanz. The head of the International Atomic Energy Agency, Rafael Grossi, told the UN security council that the above-ground pilot enrichment plant at Iran’s main nuclear facility in Natanz had been destroyed, although he said the level of radioactivity outside the plant remained unchanged.
Grossi said the UN was still gathering information about Israeli attacks on two other facilities, the Fordow fuel enrichment plant and at Isfahan.
Officers of the Israel Defense Forces made clear their war aims were to seize the opportunity offered by Iran’s flattened air defences to wreak lasting, crippling damage on Iran’s nuclear programme.
“That’s the goal, to remove the threat and to make sure they don’t have a nuclear bomb and that there is not an active existential threat on the Israeli people,” an IDF officer said.
Among the uncertainties hanging over the region was how much of Iran’s arsenal of ballistic and cruise missiles were still usable, and whether Tehran would take revenge on the US as well as Israel.
The US role in the attack remained murky. In the run-up to the Israeli 200-plane attack, Donald Trump had publicly urged Israel to give diplomacy more of a chance, before US-Iranian talks that were planned for Sunday. On Friday, the US president insisted he had been well informed of Israel’s plans, and described the Israeli attack as “excellent”.
Asked by the Wall Street Journal what kind of heads-up the US had been given, Trump responded testily: “Heads-up? It wasn’t a heads-up. It was, we know what’s going on.”
Speaking separately to ABC News, he praised the attacks and linked the timing to a 60-day ultimatum he had given Tehran in the spring, to negotiate a deal. “I think it’s been excellent. We gave them a chance and they didn’t take it. They got hit hard, very hard. They got hit about as hard as you’re going to get hit. And there’s more to come. A lot more,” Trump said.
On his own Truth Social online platform, Trump urged Iran to make a deal or face further planned attacks that would be “even more brutal”.
ABC quoted a “source familiar with the intelligence” as saying the US had provided “exquisite” intelligence and would help defend Israel as needed.
Iravani told the UN security council that the US was complicit in the attack, saying “by aiding and enabling these crimes, they share full responsibility for the consequences”. He accused Israel of seeking “to kill diplomacy, to sabotage negotiations and to drag the region into wider conflict.”
The US website Axios quoted two Israeli officials as suggesting the apparent disagreement with Israel had been a ploy, aimed at convincing Iran that no attack was imminent so the generals and scientists on the target list would not move to new locations. “We had a clear US green light,” one of the officials said.
Israel’s first wave of airstrikes took place soon after 8am Iranian time. About 200 Israeli warplanes hit 100 wide-ranging targets.
In a televised address recorded in English for the benefit of foreign audiences, Netanyahu declared: “We struck at the heart of Iran’s nuclear enrichment programme. We struck at the heart of Iran’s nuclear weaponisation programme. We targeted Iran’s main enrichment facility in Natanz. We targeted Iran’s leading nuclear scientists working on the Iranian bomb. We also struck at the heart of Iran’s ballistic missile programme.”
Iranian state media said the head of the Revolutionary Guards (IRGC), Gen Hossein Salami, the army chief of staff, Maj Gen Mohammad Bagheri, and the commander of the Khatam al-Anbia joint forces headquarters, Maj Gen Gholam Ali Rashid, were killed in the strikes, as well as six nuclear scientists, including Fereydoun Abbasi, the head of Iran’s Atomic Energy Organization from 2011 to 2013.
Israel said its assault had killed most of the senior leadership of the IRGC’s air force.
IDF officers said that operation, codename Rising Lion, had involved the infiltration of Mossad commandos before the strikes, as well as drones, to target air defences and Iran’s ballistic missiles.
Later in the day, the Mossad released grainy footage that it said showed agents on Iranian soil. Another video showed what the agency said was an attack on an Iranian defence system, while a third appeared to show an Iranian long-range missile being targeted.
Iranian civilians described a night of terrifying explosions. Golnar, a resident of Saadat Abad, in northern Tehran, said she woke to loud explosions just after 3am.
“I woke up to the first explosion and rushed to the windows to check. Then, minutes later, back to back I heard four explosions. The windows were shaking and people in the building started screaming,” she said. “Everything happened so quickly. We were scrambling for information on whether this was an attack or a natural disaster. This morning there’s debris all over the explosion site and surrounding streets.”
Ahmad Moadi, 62, said: “How much longer are we going to live in fear? As an Iranian, I believe there must be an overwhelming response, a scathing response.”
Additional reporting by Deepa Parent
In his inaugural address this January, Donald Trump declared that his proudest legacy would be that of “a peacemaker and unifier”, pledging that US power would “stop all wars and bring a new spirit of unity to a world that has been angry, violent, and totally unpredictable”.
Five months later, his second presidency is witnessing the spectacular unraveling of that lofty aspiration.
A president who vowed to end global conflicts – including one which he said he would resolve within his first 24 hours – has instead presided over their escalation – most recently the spiraling conflict between Israel and Iran.
The timeline of the latest conflict resuggests a stark disconnect between Trump’s aspirations and reality: the wave of Israeli airstrikes came just hours afterTrump urged Israel not to attack Iran.
Marco Rubio, Trump’s secretary of state, took pains to describe the Israeli attack as “unilateral”, stressing that the US was “not involved in strikes against Iran” – only for Trump to then insist he had been well informed of Israel’s plans – and warn that further attacks would be “even more brutal”.
Trump’s Middle East envoy Steve Witkoff, who has emerged as Trump’s primary diplomatic negotiator in the Middle East and Ukraine, still reportedly plans to go to Oman this weekend for talks on Tehran’s nuclear program, but it appeared unlikely the Iranians would attend.
Trump’s muddled peace agenda was already disarray long before Thursday’s attacks.
The Gaza ceasefire his administration helped broker collapsed within weeks, with Israel resuming massive bombardments and imposing a three-month total blockade on humanitarian aid to the territory, where the death toll has now surpassed at least 55,000.
In Ukraine – a conflict Trump once bragged he would end on his first day back in office – Russian forces have pressed ahead with a summer offensive, entering the Dnipropetrovsk region for the first time in three years and accumulating more forces – evidence that Putin has no interest in Trump’s peace overtures and intends to expand the war further.
Meanwhile, Trump’s abrupt announcement of a ceasefire between India and Pakistan was met with fury in New Delhi, where officials denied his claims of brokering the deal.
And while Defense Secretary Pete Hegseth acknowledged to Congress that the Pentagon has developed contingency plans to seize Greenland and Panama militarily, it’s unclear how territorial conquest fits into Trump’s definition of peacemaking.
His first term ended no wars, nearly sparked conflict with Iran, and saw his signature “peace” achievement – the Abraham accords – normalize relations between Israel and countries that weren’t fighting it anyway.
Part of Trump’s appeal to voters was precisely a promise to avoid foreign entanglements. In the stands at the inauguration viewing party, supporters told the Guardian how they valued his restraint in military deployment and favored his America-first approach that prioritized domestic concerns over international aid and intervention. And there is a an argument that for Trump peace is not an absence of conflict but rather Washington’s distance from it.
There is one potentially optimistic interpretation for the latest strikes in Iran. Alex Vatanka, the Iran director from the Middle East Institute in Washington, suggested that Israel’s attack could be a calculated gamble to shock Iran into serious negotiations. The theory holds that Israel convinced Trump to allow limited strikes that would pressure Tehran without triggering regime change, essentially using military action to restart stalled diplomacy. On Friday Trump suggested that the strike on Iran might have even improved the chances of a nuclear agreement.
“This is not likely to bring Iran back to the negotiating table,” said Andrew Borene, executive director of global security at Flashpoint and a former staff officer at the US’s office of the director of national intelligence. “It marks the opening of yet another rapidly expanding flashpoint within the global context of a new hybrid cold war, one that will be fought both on the ground and in the darkest corners of the web.”
Whether this strategy succeeds depends entirely on Iran’s response. The regime could either return to negotiations chastened, or abandon diplomacy altogether and pursue nuclear weapons more aggressively. Early indicators suggest Tehran may not be in a conciliatory mood after having its facilities bombed and leaders killed.
But even if the more optimistic readings prove correct, it does not change the broader reality: every major conflict Trump inherited or promised to resolve has intensified on his watch.
Trump promised to be a peacemaker. Instead, he’s managing multiple wars while his diplomatic initiatives collapse in real time. From Gaza to Ukraine to Iran, the world appears more volatile and dangerous than when he took his oath five months ago.
Donald Trump on Friday signed an executive order paving the way for a Nippon Steel investment in US Steel, so long as the Japanese company complies with a “national security agreement” submitted by the federal government.
Trump’s order did not detail the terms of the national security agreement. But US Steel and Nippon Steel said in a joint statement that the agreement stipulates that approximately $11bn in new investments will be made by 2028 and includes giving the US government a “golden share” – essentially veto power to ensure the country’s national security interests are protected.
“We thank President Trump and his administration for their bold leadership and strong support for our historic partnership,” the two companies said. “This partnership will bring a massive investment that will support our communities and families for generations to come. We look forward to putting our commitments into action to make American steelmaking and manufacturing great again.”
The companies have completed a Department of Justice review and received all necessary regulatory approvals, the statement said.
“The partnership is expected to be finalized promptly,” the statement said.
The companies offered few details on how the golden share would work and what investments would be made.
Trump said Thursday that he would as president have “total control” of what US Steel did as part of the investment.
Trump said then that the deal would preserve “51% ownership by Americans”. The Japan-based steelmaker had been offering nearly $15bn to purchase the Pittsburgh-based US Steel in a merger that had been delayed on national security concerns starting during Joe Biden’s presidency. Trump opposed the purchase while campaigning for the White House, yet he expressed optimism in working out an arrangement once in office.
“We have a golden share, which I control,” said Trump, although it was unclear what he meant by suggesting that the federal government would determine what US Steel does as a company.
Trump added that he was “a little concerned” about what presidents other than him would do with their golden share, “but that gives you total control”.
Still, Nippon Steel has never said it was backing off its bid to buy and control US Steel as a wholly owned subsidiary.
The proposed merger had been under review by the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States, or CFIUS, during the Trump and Biden administrations.
The order signed Friday by Trump said the CFIUS review provided “credible evidence” that Nippon Steel “might take action that threatens to impair the national security of the United States”, but such risks might be “adequately mitigated” by approving the proposed national security agreement.
The order does not detail the perceived national security risk and only provides a timeline for the national security agreement. The White House declined to provide details on the terms of the agreement.
The order said the draft agreement was submitted to US Steel and Nippon Steel on Friday. The two companies must successfully execute the agreement as decided by the treasury department and other federal agencies that are part CFIUS by the closing date of the transaction.
Trump reserves the authority to issue further actions regarding the investment as part of the order he signed on Friday.
Before dawn on Friday, Israel unleashed a wave of air strikes against more than 100 targets in Iran, including nuclear facilities, ballistic missile factories and air defense systems. The surprise Israeli attack also killed some of Iran’s most senior military commanders and nuclear scientists. The Iranian regime called it a “declaration of war” – and western powers raced to prevent a wider regional conflict that could draw in the US along with other countries in the Middle East.
While the Israeli prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, claims that he’s trying to prevent Iran from developing nuclear weapons, the attack is as much intended to blow up ongoing negotiations between Tehran and Donald Trump’s administration. While Trump’s overall foreign policy has been a disaster, for months he had resisted Netanyahu’s pleas to give Israel a green light to attack Iran, with US assistance. Trump insisted he wanted a chance to negotiate a deal with Iran’s leaders that would compel Tehran to give up its nuclear program in exchange for relief from US and other international sanctions.
After Friday’s attack, Trump suggested the Iranian regime could still be convinced to negotiate, saying Tehran “must make a deal, before there is nothing left”. He added that Israel could carry out further attacks that would be “even more brutal”. Before Trump’s aggressive comments, his secretary of state, Marco Rubio, had gone out of his way to explain that Israel had taken “unilateral action” and warned Tehran against targeting US military bases or embassies in the Middle East. “We are not involved in strikes against Iran and our top priority is protecting American forces in the region,” Rubio said.
It’s hard to imagine that Netanyahu would have launched such a brazen attack against Iran without at least some tacit support from Trump. Like all modern US presidents, Trump has lavished Israel with billions of dollars in weapons and has undermined international law and institutions like the UN security council to shield Israel from criticism. But Trump also prizes his reputation as a dealmaker, and he had invested significant political capital in negotiating an agreement with Iran. In a call this week, the president reportedly told the prime minister he preferred diplomacy.
By attacking Iran and torpedoing the negotiations, Netanyahu outplayed Trump – and the Israeli leader may well ensnare the US in a new Middle East conflict that Trump insists he does not want. Since Netanyahu unleashed multiple wars in the region after the Hamas attack on southern Israel in October 2023, he’s confident that the US will always bail him out. Even after Israel launched a war on Gaza, a two-month ground invasion of Lebanon and frequent attacks on Syria, it continues to receive virtually unlimited US weapons and political support from Washington.
Is it any surprise that Netanyahu has been emboldened to take greater risks that undermine several of Israel’s neighbors and now threaten to engulf the wider Middle East in a regional war? Starting with steadfast support from Joe Biden’s administration and continuing with Trump, Netanyahu knows that the US will always protect Israel from the costs of its escalation and adventurism. And US taxpayers are footing the bill: from October 2023 through September 2024, the US provided Israel with nearly $18bn in weapons, while the Pentagon spent another $4.9bn on its own military activities in the Middle East. That’s $22.7bn in US funding that enabled Netanyahu to prolong Israel’s brutal war on Gaza, an offensive in which Israel has committed war crimes and sparked accusations of genocide.
For its part, the Trump administration announced in February that it would send more than $8bn in new weapons to Israel – continuing Biden’s failed policy of unrestrained arms shipments and unwavering political support for Netanyahu. Trump, the supposedly grand dealmaker, has so far failed to use the most effective leverage he has over the Israeli premier: the provision of US weapons and political cover.
Despite Trump’s persistent claim that he wants to be a peacemaker who ends America’s legacy of forever wars, he now risks becoming yet another US president who is mired in a disastrous conflict in the Middle East – thanks to his refusal to restrain Netanyahu, a US ally who has not yet paid any price for his warmongering.
In his inaugural address in January, Trump reinforced his desire to establish himself as a mediator who will end global conflicts, including the wars in Ukraine and Gaza, and avoid new wars entirely. “My proudest legacy will be that of a peacemaker and unifier,” he said. Trump had also stewed for years over the fact that his predecessor, Barack Obama, won the Nobel peace prize during his first year in office in 2009, while Trump was passed over for the honor, even though he had brokered a series of diplomatic deals in 2020, known as the Abraham Accords, between Israel and several Arab states.
If Trump has any hope of winning a Nobel prize – or even salvaging a minor legacy as a peacemaker – he will need to fix the Iran agreement he tore up seven years ago.
In 2018, during his first term, Trump unilaterally withdrew the US from a deal that was signed by Obama, and had taken years for Iran to negotiate with six world powers, under which Tehran limited its nuclear enrichment in exchange for sanctions relief. The 2015 agreement, which Trump had called a “disaster”, allowed Iran to continue producing nuclear fuel at low levels, enough to operate nuclear power plants but not to produce weapons. After Trump abandoned the original deal, Iran moved closer to developing a nuclear weapon than ever before. According to the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), as of early this year, Tehran had enriched enough uranium to produce six nuclear weapons, although Iran would still need up to a year of additional work to develop an actual nuclear warhead and deploy it on a missile.
In the early weeks of his second term, Trump seemed eager to negotiate a new deal with Iran: he sent a letter to Iran’s supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, saying the US wanted to restart negotiations that had been abandoned by the Biden administration. As he often does in negotiations with friends and enemies alike, Trump then issued a threat, warning Iran’s leaders that if diplomacy failed, they would be subjected to “bombing the likes of which they have never seen before”.
In March, Trump dispatched his special envoy, Steve Witkoff, to lead a team of US negotiators to meet with top Iranian officials in mostly indirect talks mediated by Oman. Since then, Iran and the US have held five rounds of talks. The next round of negotiations was supposed to be held on Sunday, with Witkoff heading to Oman.
During its attack on Friday, Israel killed Ali Shamkhani, one of the top Iranian officials responsible for nuclear negotiations with the US. A top aide to Iran’s supreme leader, Shamkhani was not officially part of the Iranian delegation in the current round of US talks, but he played a pivotal role in overseeing nuclear policy.
Iran has pulled out of the latest round of talks scheduled for this weekend. Netanyahu might have destroyed Trump’s chance at making a deal with Iran – and the prime minister has increased the likelihood of yet another disastrous war.
Mohamad Bazzi is director of the Hagop Kevorkian Center for Near Eastern Studies, and a journalism professor at New York University
Iran has warned the US, UK and France that their military bases and ships will be targeted if they help block the Iranian missile and drone retaliation for Israel’s attack, threatening to widen an already bloody war over Tehran’s nuclear programme.
Donald Trump has said the US will help defend Israel, and American officials have been quoted in news reports saying that US forces have already helped shoot down Iranian drones and missiles as they approached Israel. France’s president, Emmanuel Macron, also said on Friday that his country would help defend Israel against Iranian reprisals.
The UK government has said its forces had not provided any military assistance to Israel as the prime minister, Keir Starmer, has emphasised the need for de-escalation.
Tehran is seeking to deter western support for Israel’s defence at a time most of the missiles and drones it fires at Israel are being intercepted before they reach their targets. However, following through on the threat, delivered on Saturday through state media, would be an enormous gamble for Iran, drawing western forces into the conflict when it is already reeling under the force of sustained Israeli bombing.
Speaking at a session of the UN security council on Friday, the US diplomat McCoy Pitt warned: “No government proxy or independent actor should target American citizens, American bases or other American infrastructure in the region. The consequences for Iran would be dire.”
On Saturday, Israeli planes focused bombing sorties on Tehran while Iran sought to hit back with salvoes of missiles and drones as the aerial war entered its second day. Israel appeared determined to cripple Iran’s nuclear programme and Iran vowed it would make Israel regret its surprise attack.
Iran’s retaliatory missile and drone strikes on Israel killed at least three people and wounded dozens. Israel’s defence minister, Israel Katz, warned Iran’s supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, that “Tehran will burn” if it keeps firing missiles at Israeli civilians.
Israel Defense Forces (IDF) said Iran had so far fired some 200 ballistic missiles at Israel, and launched more than that number of drones but claimed that the overwhelming majority had been intercepted.
Since the start of the war, the IDF said Israeli warplanes had attacked 150 targets inside Iran with hundreds of munitions. Early on Saturday, dozens of fighter jets struck targets in the Iranian capital, focusing on its air defences. An IDF official said on Saturday that those defences had largely been suppressed and that “the aerial road to Tehran is effectively open”.
Iranian state media said that a fighter jet hangar at Tehran’s Mehrabad airport had also been targeted. Iran’s state TV said about 60 people, including 20 children, had been killed in an attack on a housing complex in Tehran.
Iran’s envoy to the UN security council, Amir Saeid Iravani, said on Friday that 78 people had been killed in the Israeli attacks, and that more than 320 were injured, most of them civilians. Alongside Iran’s top generals there nine nuclear scientists among the dead, as Tehran was caught unawares by the Israeli assault.
An IDF official described the targeted scientists as the “people who were main sources of knowledge, the main forces advancing the nuclear programme”.
The Iranian government also said there was limited damage at its uranium enrichment plant at Fordow, its second enrichment facility but Israel denied having bombed it. On Friday, the IDF claimed to have inflicted “significant damage” at the plant at Natanz. The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) confirmed the above-ground part of the Natanz plant had been destroyed but noted no apparent damage to its underground chambers.
An IAEA report said that attacks caused radiological and chemical contamination in the Natanz facility, but that it was manageable and there was no sign of higher radiation in the area around the plant. Iran also said there had been attacks on its nuclear site in Isfahan, which houses a uranium conversion plant, a fuel production unit and other facilities.
The IAEA reminded Israel that attacks on nuclear sites were illegal and contrary to the UN charter, with a potential to cause “radioactive releases with grave consequences”.
Israel’s justification for its attack on Iran was that the country was getting unacceptably close to acquiring a nuclear weapon, and specifically that it was working on weaponisation, the assembly of components into a warhead. That is a claim not found in US intelligence assessments or in IAEA reports.
An IDF official on Saturday gave more details of Israel’s allegation, claiming that Iranian technicians had been working on an explosive trigger mechanism for a nuclear bomb, and that part of that work was being done in Isfahan.
“We have seen clear intelligence indicating that they are taking steps forward rapidly, that cannot be understood in any other way than for a nuclear bomb,” the official said.
Israelis in Tel Aviv and other cities spent the dawn hours on Saturday in shelters as a new barrage of Iranian missiles headed towards them, while the IDF said it had intercepted incoming drones in the skies above the Dead Sea. Later in the morning, sirens went off in the West Bank and in northern Israel, near the Sea of Galilee.
The worst casualties from the incoming missiles were in the West Bank, where five Palestinians, including three children, were killed, according to the Palestinian Red Crescent, reportedly by a projectile fired by Houthi forces in Yemen, who are Iranian allies.
Over the first 24 hours of the conflict, three Israelis were also killed, two in Rishon LeZion and one in nearby Tel Aviv, with dozens injured and extensive damage to buildings.
There were reports from Gaza of Israeli shooting of large numbers of Palestinians trying to reach food distribution points, but details were hard to confirm on the third day of a communications blackout after the severing of a critical cable by Israeli forces.
Before Israel’s attack in the early hours of Friday, Iranian and US negotiators had been due to meet in Oman to discuss a peaceful solution to the impasse over Iran’s nuclear programme.
Iran’s foreign ministry spokesperson, Esmail Baghaei, said the talks had “become meaningless”. He stopped short of declaring the negotiations cancelled. The Mizan news agency, which is run by Iran’s judiciary, quoted him as saying: “It is still not clear what we decide about Sunday’s talks.”
There was every sign on Saturday morning that the war was far from over. Overnight Israel’s prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, vowed that a lot more Israeli attacks were “on the way” while Khamenei pledged that Israel would be brought to “ruin”.
Earlier, the new head of the Revolutionary Guards, Mohammad Pakpour – hastily appointed after his predecessor was killed in Israel’s attack – threatened to open “the gates of hell” in retaliation with the Middle East facing the prospect of a full-scale war of uncertain duration.
In Tel Aviv on Friday night, smoke from one impact site rose up in columns so thick they obscured the city skyline.
Israel’s ambulance service said 34 people were injured on Friday night in the Tel Aviv area, most with minor injuries. Police later said one person had died. Another two people were confirmed killed in a direct missile strike on central Israel on Saturday morning.
The Israeli leadership and the IDF have insisted that its offensive against Iran, called Rising Lion, would continue until Tehran’s nuclear programme – which Netanyahu said was on the brink of producing weapons – was comprehensively destroyed.
Addressing the UN security council, the IAEA director-general, Rafael Grossi, warned of the potentially disastrous consequences of such attacks.
The US role in the Israeli operation remained murky. In the run-up to the Israeli 200-plane attack, Donald Trump had publicly urged Israel to give diplomacy more of a chance before US-Iranian talks that were planned for Sunday. On Friday, the US president insisted he had been well informed of Israel’s plans and described the Israeli attack as “excellent”.
ABC quoted a “source familiar with the intelligence” as saying the US had provided “exquisite” intelligence and would help defend Israel as needed.
To Donald Trump, the inspiration is the pomp and pageantry of Bastille Day, France’s annual celebration of the 1789 revolution.
For his critics, it is redolent of the authoritarian militarism proudly projected by autocracies such as Russia, China and North Korea.
Despite its military prowess and undoubted superpowers status, overt military displays in civilian settings are the exception rather than the rule in US history.
But in bringing to the streets of Washington DC on Saturday, the military parade Trump has long hankered after he – consciously or otherwise – is tapping into a tradition that harks back to antiquity.
The first known instances of victorious exhibitions of military might date back to ancient Mesopotamia, whose territory now comprises modern-day Iraq and parts of Turkey, Syria and Iran.
Mesopotamian emperors decorated their palaces and citadels with friezes portraying heroic conquests. Portraits would display a massive potentate striding ahead of his troops and crushing on his opponents’ skulls.
Military parades were also integral rituals of the Roman empire, where generals and emperors who had won battles would march from the field of Mars into the temple of Jupiter, witnessed by thousands of adoring peasants.
The looted possessions of conquered nations were said to be conveyed in chariots, while abducted barbarians were dragged along in chains. Slaves were encouraged to murmur “Memento mori” (remember that you will die) to their captors, it is said, as part of a drama supposed to link the Roman public to its leaders.
In one depicted image, created in the 19th century by the artist Bartolomeo Pinelli, the Roman military leader, Marcus Claudius Marcellus, is seen leading his triumphant army to Rome after defeating the Gauls, having personally triumphed over their leader in one-to-one combat.
These Roman rituals were later adopted by European countries as they evolved into nation states and sought to project images of power and military potency.
The military parade is widely believed to have been refined in Prussia, a European state that later became part of a unified Germany under the leadership of Otto von Bismarck.
Featuring choreography including salutes, precise spacing between soldiers, and goose steps, the Prussian model became a prototype for other armies in Europe and beyond.
Other European countries had different versions, that have in some cases become annual rituals.
In Britain, starting during the reign of Charles II, trooping the colour is held every year on Horse Guards Parade near Buckingham Palace to celebrate the sovereign’s birthday. This year’s parade, celebrating the birthday of the current King Charles, coincidentally takes place on Saturday, which is also Trump’s 79th birthday.
Staring under the Soviet Union and continuing in present day Russia, Moscow plays host on 9 May every year to victory day, commemorating victory over Nazi Germany in the second world war. During the cold war, the parades, featuring Red Army soldiers marching through Red Square viewed by the Soviet leadership, became a symbol of Moscow’s implacable hostility to the west in the ideological struggle between capitalism and communism.
Red Square was the venue for what is believed to be the largest military parade ever staged, on 24 June 1945, when 40,000 troops and 1,800 armored vehicles passed through to mark victory over Germany.
This year’s occasion, marking the 80th anniversary of the war’s end, featured even greater pomp than usual, with troops from China, Egypt, Belarus and several central Asian countries marching alongside their Russian counterparts. China’s leader, Xi Jinping, was among several international statesman joining Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, in the reviewing stands.
Comparable displays of military muscle are seen in China. The national day parade in Beijing’s Tiananmen Square – marking the anniversary of the Communist regime’s ascent to power – is now a once-a-decade affair but used to occur more regularly.
The most recent event, which took place on 1 October 2019 to celebrate the regime’s 70th birthday, was billed as the biggest military parade and mass pageant ever held in China.
Beijing’s ally, North Korea, holds annual parades to celebrate the date of the state’s founding, as well as separate events to mark the birthdays of its dynastic leaders.
Strikingly, if less well-documented, Pyongyang’s parades are mirrored by equivalent events in democratic South Korea, which stages armed forces day annually on 1 October to mark the anniversary of its troops crossing the 38th parallel during the Korean war.
By contrast, choreographed exhibitions are much rarer in the US.
The most recent parade was instigated by Trump himself during his first presidency when – apparently triggered by having watched a Bastille Day parade alongside the French president, Emmanuel Macron, in Paris – his administration organized a Salute to America event to coincide with the 4 July celebrations in 2019.
That display on Washington’s national mall included aircraft flyovers, presentations of military vehicles and an address by Trump at the Lincoln memorial.
It was the first military parade in the US Capitol since a June 1991 extravaganza, watched by an estimated 200,000 spectators, to celebrate expelling Saddam Hussein’s Iraqi forces from Kuwait in the first Gulf war. Tanks and Patriot missile batteries were rolled out while Stealth fighter jets flew above a parade led by general Norman Schwarzkopf, the commander of coalition forces in the conflict.
The 1953 presidential inauguration of Dwight Eisenhower, a former general of US and allied forces in the second world war, included a parade by 22,000 troops and even a nuclear-capable cannon. In a similar vein, John F Kennedy, a decorated military veteran, had military hardware on show at his 1961 inaugural.
Others notable military parades took place to mark the end of the first and second world war, as well as the American civil war.
A ticker tape welcome was afforded victorious troops, including 13,000 members of the 82nd airborne division, in a spectacular victory parade in New York in 1946 that was seen by an estimated 4 million people.
Similar parades were staged in New York and Washington in 1919, with Gen John Pershing, commander of the American Expeditionary Force that had fought in France, leading 25,000 parading soldiers in full battle dress.
In 1865, after Abraham Lincoln’s assassination in the immediate aftermath of the American civil war, his successor Andrew Johnson ordered a two-day grand review of the armies. The result saw about 145,000 soldiers from the armies of the Potomac, Georgia and Tennessee marching down Pennsylvania Avenue, to be reviewed by victorious Union generals, Ulysses S Grant, William Sherman and George Meade.
In general, however, US presidents have avoided explicitly militaristic displays – until now.
A stark contrast to Trump’s bullish attitude was offered by a Republican predecessor, Gerald Ford, who declined to take part in the military parades organized for the 1976 bicentennial celebrations, citing the enduring negative sentiment over the Vietnam war.
Ford’s posture may seem extreme but it may be more in keeping with the feelings of America’s founding fathers towards militarism, according to Jonathan Alter, a historian who has chronicled several US presidencies.
“The United States was founded by men who were admirers of the Roman Republic, which had an important law that military commanders could not bring their troops into Rome,” he explained.
The law, however was violated by Julius Caesar, who crossed the Rubicon river in 49BC with his forces at the start of a civil war that was to result in him acquiring dictatorial powers.
“It was a hugely significant thing, and a violation of 400 years of very important Roman tradition which the founders of our country were quite aware of,” Alter said. “That’s the way military dictatorship lies, if you have the head of state bringing his army into the capital.
“We have a more modest tradition when it comes to showing military power. It goes back to George Washington. There’s always been a sense that tanks in the capital are a bad sign, even if it’s just for a parade.”
Today the US army will parade in style along the National Mall in Washington DC to celebrate its 250th anniversary. This also just happens to be the 79th birthday of President Donald J Trump. As commander-in-chief, he will take the salute from a viewing platform on Constitution Avenue.
But this is not a mere vanity project, as some critics have claimed. History really matters to the US’s 47th president. One of Trump’s last acts before reluctantly leaving the White House in January 2021 was to publish a report by his “1776 Commission”, created to “restore understanding of the greatness of the American Founding”. Deliberately, the commissioners included few university historians because universities were described as often being “hotbeds of anti-Americanism, libel, and censorship that combine to generate in students and in the broader culture at the very least disdain and at worst outright hatred for this country”.
The 1776 Commission demanded a return to truly “patriotic education”, declaring: “We must resolve to teach future generations of Americans an accurate history of our country so that we all learn and cherish our founding principles once again. We must renew the pride and gratitude we have for this incredible nation that we are blessed to call home.”
In this spirit, on 2 May this year, the president posted that he was renaming 8 May and 11 November respectively as “Victory Day for World War II and Victory Day for World War I” because “we won both Wars, nobody was close to us in terms of strength, bravery, or military brilliance”, and it was time for the US to “start celebrating our victories again!”
The parade on 14 June is also intended to raise the curtain on a spectacular nationwide celebration of the 250th anniversary of US independence, extending right across the country and culminating on 4 July 2026. According to the White House website, one feature will be a video history series that “tells the remarkable story of American Independence. It will highlight the stories of the crucial characters and events that resulted in a small rag-tag army defeating the mightiest empire in the world and establishing the greatest republic ever to exist.”
History on parade, indeed. As is often the case, Trump does start with a valid point. After he witnessed the extravaganza of Bastille Day in 2017, where French and American troops marched down the Champs-Élysées to celebrate the centenary of the US’s entry into the first world war, he was determined to stage a parade of his own. So what’s wrong with that? Shouldn’t countries be proud of their past?
OK (if you don’t mind the cost). But pride should be rooted in honesty, especially when Nato in Europe is engaged in a proxy war in Ukraine against Vladimir Putin, a systematic falsifier of history. And if we’re trying to be honest, world wars aren’t like the World Series with one country trumping all the others and winning almost single-handedly.
Take the second world war. On 3 May this year, former Russian president Dmitry Medvedev dismissed Trump’s claims as “pretentious nonsense”, asserting that “Victory Day is ours and it is 9 May. So it was, so it is, so it will always be!” Medvedev is now an obedient Putinist, but he and other Russians rightly point to their huge losses in 1941-45 – roughly 27 million people. Stated differently, in the three years from June 1941 to June 1944, between Hitler’s invasion of the Soviet Union and the D-day landings in Normandy, more than 90% of the German army’s battle casualties (killed, wounded, missing and prisoners) were inflicted by the Red Army. That puts Alamein and Tunis, Anzio and the liberation of Rome into a different perspective.
Yet Americans can rightly say that they were in a league of their own as a “superpower” – a word coined in 1944 to signify “great power and great mobility of power”. Their huge C-47 transport planes and the B-17 and B-24 bombers allowed the US to wage war right across the world. Their modern fleets of aircraft carriers, built to avenge Pearl Harbor, island-hopped across the Pacific to Japan itself. The Pacific war ended with the firebombing of Tokyo and the nuclear obliteration of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Or consider the speed of the remarkable breakout from Normandy that enabled allied armies to liberate Brussels on 3 September 1944, occupying positions they had not expected to reach until May 1945. When an astonished Winston Churchill asked how the GIs were being fed and supplied, US general Omar Bradley said he was running trucks up to the front “bumper to bumper, 24 hours a day”. Ford delivered the goods.
But Britain also played a crucial part in victory. Had our embattled island gone the same way as Scandinavia, France and the Low Countries in the summer of 1940, Hitler would have thrown all his resources against the Soviet Union, while Roosevelt’s US would probably have turned in on itself and concentrated on defending the western hemisphere. Instead, a combination of Churchillian leadership, modern fighters linked to the new Chain Home system of radar and the courage of the RAF pilots managed to keep Hitler at bay. Eventually, Britain became the essential supply base and launchpad for the liberation of Hitler’s Fortress Europe.
And so in 1944-45, the allied armies converged on Germany from east, west and south. Of course, it was an unholy alliance, animated by divergent aims and values. But the extermination of nazism was a goal all the allies shared.
With this in mind, let’s glance back to the US’s most important victory: independence. Yes, this was in large measure a David v Goliath story of “a small rag-tag army defeating the mightiest empire in the world”. The US’s independence was indeed testimony to George Washington’s leadership and his troops’ courage and resilience (reinforced by his insistence on inoculation against the smallpox epidemic). But this was also a world war as the British empire battled against its global foes. Crucially, by the 1780s Britain lost naval supremacy because (unusually) three rival seapowers had combined against it: France, Spain and the Dutch. It was blockade by the French fleet that forced Lord Cornwallis’s historic surrender at Yorktown in 1781 and British acceptance of American independence.
The purpose of historical research is to set events in context, not to boost national pride. The story of the US’s founding, like that of Hitler’s defeat, reminds us that allies matter – in the past, the present and the future. That should not be forgotten when history goes on parade.
Mirrors of Greatness by David Reynolds (HarperCollins Publishers, £12.99). To support the Guardian, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.
Ukraine has repatriated more bodies of fallen soldiers in accordance with an agreement reached during peace talks in Istanbul, Ukrainian officials said Friday. Ukraine’s Coordination Headquarters for the Treatment of Prisoners of War said Russia had returned 1,200 bodies, and “according to the Russian side, the bodies belong to Ukrainian citizens, in particular military personnel”. The repatriation of the bodies was carried out with the help of Ukraine’s armed forces, the country’s security service, the interior ministry and other government agencies, its statement said. Forensic experts would now work to identify the remains. The repatriation marks one of the war’s largest returns of remains.
Russia says its forces have captured another village in Ukraine’s north-eastern Sumy region amid its ramped-up offensive there. Moscow’s defence ministry said on Friday it had taken control of the village of Yablunivka, about 9km (five miles) from the Russian border. Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskyy has said Ukrainian forces are “gradually pushing back the occupiers” in the border region but prevailing assessments have shown Russian gains.
Russia’s defence ministry said Russian forces had also taken control of two other Ukrainian villages – Koptevo and Komar in the eastern Donetsk region, Russia’s Tass news agency reported. The ministry said Russian troops had captured six Ukrainian villages over the past week. The battlefield reports could not be independently verified.
A 73-year-old American jailed by Russia as a mercenary for Ukraine protested his innocence when his US-based legal team and family finally tracked him down in April, months after he vanished into the vast Russian prison system, they said. Stephen Hubbard, a retired schoolteacher, was sentenced last October to almost seven years in a penal colony and Russian state media reported that he had entered a guilty plea in the closed-door trial. His US-based lawyer, who made his first public comments on the case to the New York Times this week, said: “The first thing Hubbard wanted to talk about when he was able to make contact with the outside world was: ‘It’s not true.’” US officials have requested his immediate release.
Ukraine’s air force said on Friday that Russia fired 55 Shahed and decoy drones and four ballistic missiles at Ukraine overnight. The air force said air defences had neutralised 43 drones. There were no immediate reports of casualties or damage. Russia’s defence ministry, meanwhile, said its air defences had downed 125 Ukrainian drones over several Russian regions and the annexed region of Crimea into early Friday.
One of the most consequential Russian defectors in history was turned away several times by the US before he was eventually accepted by Britain and exfiltrated with his family from Russia, according to revelations in a new book.
Vasili Mitrokhin, a KGB archivist who spent years copying top-secret documents on some of the most sensitive Soviet spies and operations, was brought out of Russia in 1992 by MI6. His archive of copied documents was exfiltrated separately. But London got hold of his trove only after Mitrokhin gave up trying to get the US to take him seriously.
“The CIA turned Mitrokhin away multiple times, sometimes due to decisions of those on the ground and sometimes due to instructions from headquarters,” said Gordon Corera, a former BBC correspondent who has written a new book about the defector. “This would be the source of bitter recriminations later when his value became clear.”
Mitrokhin’s findings formed the basis for hundreds of counterintelligence investigations across the world during the 1990s. His defection was made public in 1999, when a book about his findings was published jointly with the historian Christopher Andrew. Mitrokhin lived under a new identity in Britain, and died in 2004.
The 1999 book mentioned in passing that Mitrokhin had first offered his services to the US, but it transpires that there was more than one attempt, and Mitrokhin was furious the Americans had turned him down, making it clear to them later that Britain had been his second choice.
Mitrokhin, an introvert who was sent to work in the KGB archives after a failed career as a spy, was motivated by a sense of disgust at the KGB and its role in the Soviet system and made it a condition of his defection that the documents he had copied should be made public. Many of his original files were opened to the public at an archive in Cambridge in 2014, although some of them have now been closed again due to privacy concerns.
His notes contained the names of hundreds of agents in the west who had collaborated with the KGB. In Britain, the name that got the most attention was Melita Norwood, who was 87 when the Mitrokhin revelations were published. She admitted passing information about the British nuclear programme to the KGB. There was also detailed historical information about the “illegals”, Moscow’s most secret spies who lived under deep cover disguised as westerners.
Mitrokhin retired from the KGB in 1984, but it was only after the Soviet collapse, in 1992, that he decided to offer up his secret archive to western intelligence services. He travelled, disguised as a dishevelled villager so as not to attract attention from border guards, with a sample of his documents hidden below lengths of sausage in a scruffy bag. The disguise was so good that when he arrived as a “walk-in” at the newly opened US embassies in Riga and Vilnius, he was not taken seriously. On one occasion, a cable about him was sent back to CIA headquarters, but was not acted on.
Instead, he tried the British embassy, and a young diplomat in Vilnius offered him a cup of tea and suggested he return later, when MI6 officers could be sent out to assess his credibility. When that happened, MI6 realised that the strange walk-in was sitting on a potential goldmine. In a strange twist, the Treasury refused to pay the substantial costs for his exfiltration and resettlement, and so MI6 asked the Americans, who ended up footing the bill for the defector they had originally turned down, in exchange for full access to his material.
During a meeting in London with an FBI and CIA team, introduced to Mitrokhin by their British counterparts, the defector erupted in anger. “It is your fault that because you turned me down I am here with the British … I always wanted to be in the US,” he said.
Corera said he did not ask for or receive any help from MI6 in his research for the book, though it is understood that he was able to speak to former operatives who were involved in the Mitrokhin case. For the first time, he reveals the details of how Mitrokhin was exfiltrated from the Soviet Union with his family by MI6 operatives using a tourist minibus as a disguise.
Corera said he was drawn to the story of Mitrokhin because he had the feeling that in 1999 the importance of Mitrokhin’s disclosures was somewhat lost, given the sense that the cold war was over and the west had little to fear from Moscow’s spying.
“I think he is one of the most under appreciated spies and defectors in cold war and post cold war history. It’s only now in hindsight more than 25 years after news of his defection becomes public you can see how important he was,” he said.
The Spy in the Archive: How one man tried to kill the KGB by Gordon Corera, is published by William Collins
A federal judge declined to order the release of Palestinian activist Mahmoud Khalil, a setback for the former Columbia University student days after a major ruling against the Trump administration’s efforts to keep him detained.
Khalil, a green-card holder who has not been charged with a crime, is one of the most high-profile people targeted by the US government’s crackdown on pro-Palestinian campus activism. Despite key rulings in his favor, Khalil has been detained since March, missing the birth of his son.
His advocates were hopeful earlier in the week that he was close to walking free. On Wednesday, Judge Michael E Farbiarz ruled the Trump administration could no longer detain Khalil on the basis of claims that he posed a threat to US foreign policy. The federal judge in New Jersey said efforts to deport him based on those grounds were likely unconstitutional.
Farbiarz had given the US government until Friday morning to appeal against the order, which the Trump administration did not do. Khalil’s lawyers then argued he must be released immediately, but the government said it would keep him detained in a remote detention facility in Louisiana. The administration argued it was authorized to continue detaining him based on alternative grounds – its allegations that he lied on his green-card application.
On Friday, Farbiarz said Khalil’s lawyers had failed to present enough evidence that detention based on the green-card claims was unlawful, suggesting attorneys for the 30-year-old activist could seek bail from a Louisiana immigration judge.
Khalil’s have strongly rejected the government’s assertions about problems with his green-card application, arguing the claims were a pretext to keep him detained.
“Mahmoud Khalil was detained in retaliation for his advocacy for Palestinian rights,” Amy Greer, one of his attorneys, said in a statement on Friday evening.
“The government is now using cruel, transparent delay tactics to keep him away from his wife and newborn son ahead of their first Father’s Day as a family. Instead of celebrating together, he is languishing in [immigration] detention as punishment for his advocacy on behalf of his fellow Palestinians. It is unjust, it is shocking, and it is disgraceful.”
Khalil has previously disputed the notion that he omitted information on his application.
In a filing last week, he maintained he was never employed by or served as an “officer” of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees, as the administration claims, but completed an internship approved by the university as part of his graduate studies.
Khalil said he also stopped working for the British embassy in Beirut in December 2022, when he moved to the US, despite the administration’s claims that he had worked in the embassy’s Syria office longer.
The Friday ruling prolonging his detention came the same day a group of celebrity fathers filmed a video reading Khalil’s letter to his newborn son. The Father’s Day campaign, published by the American Civil Liberties Union, called for Khalil’s freedom and included actors Mark Ruffalo, Mahershala Ali, Arian Moayed and Alex Winter.
Earlier in the week, when there was a ruling in Khalil’s favor, Dr Noor Abdalla, his wife, released a statement, saying: “True justice would mean Mahmoud was never taken away from us in the first place, that no Palestinian father, from New York to Gaza, would have to endure the painful separation of prison walls like Mahmoud has. I will not rest until Mahmoud is free.”
Marco Rubio, the US secretary of state, has previously claimed Khalil must be expelled because his continued presence would harm American foreign policy, an effort that civil rights advocates said was a blatant crackdown on lawful free speech.
Marines deployed to Los Angeles detained a civilian on Friday, the US military confirmed to Reuters after being presented with the news wire’s images.
This is the first known instance of active-duty troops deployed by Donald Trump detaining a civilian.
The incident took place at the Wilshire Federal Building, where marines took charge of the mission to protect the building earlier on Friday, in a rare domestic use of US troops after days of protests over immigration raids.
We are wrapping up our live coverage of the second Trump administration for the day. We will be back on Saturday, as nationwide protests are planned. Here are some of Friday’s developments:
Donald Trump formally approved Nippon Steel’s $14.9 billion bid for US Steel on Friday, signing an executive order to allow what Trump has called a “partnership” between the companies to move forward.
Tennessee state representative Justin Jones attended a hearing in Nashville on Friday for Kilmar Ábrego García, and accused the Trump administration of “drumming up these politicized charges”.
Trump claimed to have known “everything” about Israel’s overnight attack on Iran, but The Atlantic reported that Trump told Benjamin Netanyahu earlier this week “he believed that a deal was still possible and didn’t want to risk a wider war”. While Trump insists a nuclear deal, to replace the 2015 one he scuttled during his first term, remain possible, an unnamed diplomat told the Atlantic: “Israel just killed their negotiators.”
The former Voice of America correspondent Steve Herman reports that the United States Agency for Global Media “urgently called back to work the staff of the Voice of America’s Farsi language service” on Friday.
Marcos Leao, the first civilian detained by US marines since Trump deployed troops to California, is an army veteran who was on his way to a Veterans Affairs office when he crossed a yellow-tape boundary.
Video posted on Instagram on Friday gives a sense of the anger in east Los Angeles over sweeps in which federal border patrol agents are stopping people on the streets and forcing them to prove that they are US citizens.
About 2,000 anti-Trump protests are planned across the United States on Saturday, timed to coincide with the military parade in Washington DC the president is throwing himself on the 250th anniversary of the US army’s founding, and his own 79th birthday.
Donald Trump formally approved Nippon Steel’s $14.9bn bid for US Steel on Friday, signing an executive order saying what Trump has called a “partnership” between the companies to move forward if the companies signed an agreement with the treasury department resolving national security concerns posed by the deal.
The companies later announced they had signed the agreement, fulfilling the conditions of Trump’s directive and effectively garnering approval for the merger.
“We look forward to putting our commitments into action to make American steelmaking and manufacturing great again,” the companies said in the statement, thanking Trump.
It remains unclear how the final deal is different from the takeover of the US company by the Japanese one that was blocked by then-president Joe Biden after the 2024 election, and which Trump had promised to stop in elected.
The Japanese financial news site Nikkei reported that Trump was simply “paving the way for the Japanese company to finalize its takeover of its American counterpart.”
One difference might be that the deal will give the US government a “golden share” in the company, a rarely used practice through which the government takes a stake in company.
“We have a ‘golden share’, which I control, the president controls,” Trump told reporters at the White House on Thursday. “If that gives you total control, it’s 51% ownership by Americans.”
It was not immediately clear what structural element of the deal Trump was referring to, Reuters noted, but according to Trump the share means that Americans would have a 51% share in the ownership of the steelmaker.
As Reuters reports, Donald Trump filed the first public financial disclosure report of his second term on Friday, providing what he said was the latest information about his holdings, including income from his family’s foray into cryptocurrencies.
Trump reported earning $57.35m from token sales at crypto firm World Liberty Financial, the cryptocurrency firm that he launched during last year’s presidential campaign. He also reported holding 15.75bn “governance tokens” in the venture. A licensing deal involving a related industry, NFT collectibles, produced another $1.2m.
The annual report was signed as of 13 June, but it was not immediately clear what time period it covered.
The disclosure also showed the income from Trump’s properties in Florida.
 Trump’s three golf-focused resorts in the state – Jupiter, Doral and West Palm Beach – plus his nearby private members’ club at Mar-a-Lago, generated at least $217.7m in income, according to the filing.
Earlier this week, Massachusetts senator Elizabeth Warren said that Democrats should demand amendments to the Genius Act, a bill to regulate the $250 bn market for stablecoins, including one that would stop Trump “from lining his pockets with shady crypto deals”.
Video posted on Instagram on Friday gives a sense of the anger in Los Angeles over sweeps in which federal border patrol agents are stopping people on the streets and forcing them to prove that they are US citizens.
Brian Gavidia, who owns El Guapo Auto Sales, and was wearing a t-shirt with the name of his small business, told Brittny Mejia of the Los Angeles Times that he was stopped and pushed against a fence by a border patrol agent in Montebello, in east Los Angeles county, on Thursday.
In video recorded by a friend, who was outraged by the incident and suggested Gavidia’s crime was “walking while brown”, the officer can be heard asking him to prove that he was born in the US by naming the hospital.
“I don’t know,” Gavidia said. “I was born here in the states, East LA bro, I just fucking showed you, I got real ID here”.
Gavidia told the Times he gave his real ID to the agent who never gave it back to him. On Instagram later, he accused the federal agents of racial profiling.
In a series of clips posted on Instagram by Gavidia, some of which were then posted on X by the journalist Pablo Manríquez, the LA native can be heard angrily denouncing the heavily armed federal agents as they swept through the neighborhood, stopping men they suspected on being undocumented immigrants.
"I'm American, Motherfucker!": East Los Angeles Latinos Run ICE Agents Off Their Block After Racial Profiling Incident pic.twitter.com/fbDqvStk4j
In an Instagram story, Gavidia also posted a clip from the 1985 Cheech Marin music video for Born in East LA, a parody of Born in the USA.
In the clip, when an immigration officer demands to know where Marin was born, he replies, I was born in East LA.
On Friday, Marin uploaded the poster for the 1987 movie of the same name that he starred in to his Instagram account. He wrote next to the image:
What I wrote as a comedy – ‘Born in East L.A.’ – nearly 40 years ago now feels like a documentary.
   Back then, we used humor to spotlight the absurdities and heartbreak of immigration policy. Today, the story is even more real. It continues to affect families, friends, workers, and communities all over the country. 
   Immigrants have always been the sabor of our nation. Their resilience, culture, and contributions help define what it means to be proudly American.#BornInEastLA #ProudlyAmerican
Tennessee state representative Justin Jones attended a hearing in Nashville on Friday for Kilmar Ábrego García, the man returned to the US last week after being wrongfully deported to El Salvador.
At the hearing, Ábrego García pleaded not guilty to criminal charges of taking part in a conspiracy to smuggle migrants into the United States.
In a video statement posted on social media from outside the courthouse, Jones accused the Trump administration of “drumming up these politicized charges to characterize him as dangerous”.
“The cooperating witnesses” who testified against Ábrego García, Jones said, are “being offered deals in exchange for their testimony; they have conflicting testimony”.
“This trial is a politicized trial and its the weaponization of the government against one man,” Jones added.
Ábrego García’s lawyers told the judge that some government witnesses cooperated to get favors regarding their immigration status or criminal charges they were facing, the Associated Press reports. A federal agent acknowledged during his testimony that one witness was living in the US illegally with a criminal record and is now getting preferred status.
 “He sounds like the exact type of person this government should be trying to deport,” federal public defender Dumaka Shabazz said. “They’re going to give all these other people deals to stay in the country just to get this one other person.”
“If Mr Ábrego García is so dangerous, this violent MS-13 guy, why did they wait almost three years to indict him on this?” Shabazz asked the judge. “Why wait until literally after the supreme court told them they denied him due process and they had to bring him back before they investigate him?”
Marcos Leao, the first detained civilian by the US marines since Trump deployed troops to California, spoke to reporters after he was released.
Leao, an army veteran, said he was on his way to an office of the Department of Veterans Affairs when he crossed a yellow-tape boundary and was asked to stop, according to Reuters.
The 27-year-old, who gained his US citizenship through military service, said he was treated “very fairly”.
“They’re just doing their job,” said Leao, who is of Angolan and Portuguese descent.
A little more background from Reuters on this unprecedented detainment:
The troops are authorized to detain people who pose a threat to federal personnel or property, but only until police can arrest them. Military officials are not allowed to carry out arrests themselves.
The Posse Comitatus Act generally forbids the U.S. military, including the National Guard, from taking part in civilian law enforcement.
Trump could take a more far-reaching step by invoking the Insurrection Act, which would allow troops to directly participate in civilian law enforcement.
Reuters wire photos identify the detained man as Marcos Leao, a 27-year-old veteran.
It is unclear if he is still in US custody.
Reuters images showed US marines apprehending a civilian, restraining his hands with zip ties and then handing him over to civilians from the Department of Homeland Security.
The zip ties are visible in the below Reuters photo:
And another angle of the arrest outside the Wilshire Federal Building:
When Reuters asked about the incident, US military’s northern command spokesperson said active duty forces “may temporarily detain an individual in specific circumstances”.
“Any temporary detention ends immediately when the individual(s) can be safely transferred to the custody of appropriate civilian law enforcement personnel,” the spokesperson told Reuters.
Marines deployed to Los Angeles detained a civilian on Friday, the US military confirmed to Reuters after being presented with the news wire’s images.
This is the first known instance of active-duty troops deployed by Donald Trump detaining a civilian.
The incident took place at the Wilshire Federal Building, where marines took charge of the mission to protect the building earlier on Friday, in a rare domestic use of US troops after days of protests over immigration raids.
While Donald Trump claimed earlier Friday to have known “everything” about Israel’s overnight attack on Iran, that doesn’t mean he fully supported it.
The Atlantic is reporting that Trump called Benjamin Netanyahu earlier this week and said “he believed that a deal [with Iran] was still possible and didn’t want to risk a wider war”.
“When Netanyahu raised the possibility of a pre-emptive strike, Trump said he preferred the diplomatic route,” the Atlantic reported Friday afternoon.
The article also points out that Netanyahu’s attack drastically imperils Trump’s ability to cut a deal with Iran, and spoke to an unnamed diplomat who said, “Israel just killed their negotiators.”
The official investigation into Air India flight AI171 is focusing on the Boeing 787’s engine thrust, wing flaps and landing gear, with the airline’s maintenance regime also coming under scrutiny.
With one black box now retrieved from the wreckage of the plane, India’s Aircraft Accident Investigation Bureau is looking at whether the plane’s engine thrust and wing flaps failed, and why the landing gear remained open.
According to a Reuters report quoting a source with direct knowledge, investigators will also look at whether Air India was at fault, including on maintenance issues.
Flight AI171 issued a mayday call to air traffic control moments after takeoff from Ahmedabad on Thursday, having barely left the runway before descending and crashing into a building, killing all but one of the 242 people onboard.
While the digital flight data recorder has been recovered from the rooftop of the building, the cockpit voice recorder that could shed light on the pilots’ actions has not been found.
According to the Reuters source, a bird strike leading to double engine failure – which forced the miraculous landing of US Airways flight 1549 in 2009 on New York’s Hudson river, and had been put forward by a range of experts as a potential explanation – was “not among the key areas of focus”. CCTV footage appears to show clouds of dust at take-off but no birds.
Teams of anti-terror experts were part of the investigation process, they said. US and UK officials were joining the India-led inquiry.
While cautioning against jumping to conclusions, aviation analysts have put forward a range of theories of possible causes for the tragedy – the first fatal crash involving a Boeing 787 Dreamliner.
Dr Sonya Brown, a senior lecturer in aerospace design at the University of New South Wales, said the footage suggested the plane had stalled. “It does look to me like a significant loss of thrust. Aircraft lift is proportional to speed squared, so if you don’t have thrust and you lose speed – and radar data suggests after the initial short climb it was losing speed – you can stall,” Brown said.
What caused the lack of thrust remained unclear, Brown said.
According to some analysts’ interpretation, the video footage shows the plane’s wing flaps were not extended during takeoff. These panels on the wings of a plane can be extended to help generate lift and are key during takeoff and landing – the points in flight when most air accidents occur.
However, Brown said that even if the flaps were not deployed, a stall could still be avoided with increased thrust – adding that incorrect thrust settings due to human error could be one cause. She also noted that while the plane was modern, it was 11 years old, so the potential for inadequate maintenance could be investigated.
While pilot error is a potential avenue of any crash investigation, the Air India captain Sumeet Sabharwal and co-pilot Clive Kundar were highly experienced; Sabharwal had clocked up more than 8,000 flying hours in 22 years as a commercial airline pilot.
Questions about the plane itself are less immediate than in the aftermath of the Boeing 737 Max crashes of 2018 and 2019, which came soon after that model’s entry into service.
Although India’s aviation regulator has directed Air India to carry out safety inspections on its 33 remaining 787 fleet, the model has been flown for more than a decade by the Indian carrier and airlines worldwide, with relatively few problems.
Air India has also been ordered to carry out “additional maintenance actions” on the fleet, which is equipped with GE Aerospace engines – not the Rolls-Royce Trent 1,000 engines fitted to many 787s, which were grounded to address defects in recent years.
Neil Hansford, a former pilot and chair of the Strategic Aviation Solutions consultancy, said other theories the investigators should examine were potential sabotage, noting political tensions in Gujarat state, of which Ahmedabad is the largest city.
Contaminated fuel was another possibility, he said. The plane’s fuel tank was reportedly near-full, but Hansford said contaminants could lead to clogging. “Blocking fuel could cause an engine problem,” he said.
The 787 is a two-engine plane but is able to fly on one engine, one of many layers of redundancy – from backup power sources, computer monitoring systems such as autopilot and the ability for a plane to glide – baked into modern aviation that has made it, despite this latest tragedy, one of the statistically safest forms of transport.
But, Brown said: “All of these things are more effective if you have time, but this happened so soon after takeoff. If you had the same issue at 40,000ft, it’s very different to 400ft. There’s just not many layers of redundancy at that altitude.”
 This article was amended on 15 June 2025. Ahmedabad is not the capital of Gujarat state, as we said in an earlier version Ahmedabad is the largest city in Gujarat state, and Gandhinagar is the capital. This has been corrected.
Britain did not provide military support to Israel’s attack on Iran or help shoot down Iranian drones, the UK government has said, as Keir Starmer called for all parties to urgently de-escalate.
The prime minister spoke to Israel’s Benjamin Netanyahu on Friday afternoon during which, according to an official readout, he emphasised that “Israel has a right to self-defence” but also that the conflict needed a diplomatic solution.
A spokesperson said Starmer “set out the UK’s grave concerns about Iran’s nuclear programme” but also “reiterated the need for de-escalation” in the interests of regional stability after Israel’s air and drone attack on Iran’s nuclear facilities, air defence and military leadership.
Earlier, the prime minister’s spokesperson said: “The UK did not participate in Israel’s strikes overnight,” and they indicated that the RAF had also not taken part in any military action to knock out Iranian drones attacking Israel in a counterattack launched by Tehran in the morning.
The US has also said it was not involved in the attack on Iran, describing the Israeli action as unilateral, and it warned Iran and its allies not to target US interests or personnel in the region.
Britain was previously involved in Israel’s defence in April 2024, when RAF Typhoons shot down drones fired by Iran, and to a more limited extent in October 2024, during a ballistic missile attack by Tehran.
There has been a hardening of the British line on Israel, with ministers having condemned its aid blockade of Gaza and placed sanctions on two members of the Israeli government.
More sanctions were being considered against Israel if the situation in Gaza did not improve, Starmer said in an interview with Bloomberg on Friday. In the same interview, he backed a Nato plan to lift defence spending from 2.5% of GDP in 2027 to 3.5%, though he said he would not commit to a date.
Starmer said on Friday: “The reports of these strikes are concerning and we urge all parties to step back and reduce tensions urgently. Escalation serves no one in the region. Stability in the Middle East must be the priority and we are engaging partners to de-escalate. Now is the time for restraint, calm and a return to diplomacy.”
Britain has justified previous interventions on the grounds that it was coming to Israel’s defence, providing a small contribution alongside US and Jordanian air forces. The US said it shot down 70 drones in April 2024.
Speaking at the Scottish Conservatives’ conference on Friday, the Conservative leader, Kemi Badenoch, said she agreed with Israel’s strikes on Iran and that the UK “should not be confused about whose side we’re on”.
Badenoch said: “We cannot have Iran getting nuclear weapons. Iran has tried to carry out terrorist attacks on our soil. Let’s be very clear, Iran getting nuclear weapons would be destructive for the UK, so yes [I agree with Israel’s attacks].”
Sign up to First Edition
Our morning email breaks down the key stories of the day, telling you what’s happening and why it matters
after newsletter promotion
In a coordinated response, European leaders called for immediate de-escalation on Friday and urged against retaliation. The European Commission president, Ursula von der Leyen, described the Israeli attacks as “deeply alarming”. She said a diplomatic resolution was “more urgent than ever” for regional stability and global security.
Emmanuel Macron, the French president, and Friedrich Merz, the German chancellor, spoke with Starmer by telephone on Friday morning. Downing Street said the leaders “discussed the long-held grave concerns about Iran’s nuclear programme” and “agreed that a diplomatic resolution, rather than military action, was the way forward”.
Merz said Berlin would use “all available diplomatic means” to avoid escalation. The aim must remain “that Iran not develop any nuclear weapons”, he said.
Macron also appealed for restraint and said Paris had “repeatedly condemned” Iran’s nuclear programme. In that context, Macron said, France “reaffirms Israel’s right to defend itself and ensure its security”.
The Italian foreign minister, Antonio Tajani, said he had called his Israeli counterpart to urge de-escalation and would make the same request to Iran’s foreign minister later. “I will insist on support for diplomacy,” Tajani told Italian TV.
Some leaders were openly critical of Israel’s actions. The Spanish deputy prime minister Yolanda Díaz accused the Israeli prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, of “dragging the world towards an escalation of war”. She called for “respect for international law, immediate sanctions against the Israeli regime and a multilateral route toward a just and lasting peace”.
Turkey’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, described the attacks as a “clear provocation” and said Netanyahu “and his massacre network” were “setting our entire region and the world on fire”.
My friend and colleague Suman Fernando, who has died aged 92, had an international reputation in the field of critical psychiatry, particularly in relation to advocating for race equity in mental health.
As well as being a consultant psychiatrist in the NHS for more than 20 years, Suman wrote 14 books and many articles in which he consistently and methodically challenged institutional racism in British mental health provision.
In his first book, Race and Culture in Society (1988), he explored the role that race and culture play in how people experience mental health issues and services. In his breakthrough 1991 book, Mental Health, Race and Culture, he challenged the dominance and singularity of the medical model, and argued that any service response for minority communities should also focus on social, cultural and institutional issues.
Suman often juxtaposed the western, individualised notion of mental illness with those of the global south or indigenous healing systems that see fragmentation of community cohesion as causal, with responses that are more spiritual and community-based. It is worth noting that the relatively recent inclusion of practices such as mindfulness and yoga into mental health recovery in the west are precisely those that have underpinned indigenous models for centuries.
Born in Colombo in Ceylon (now Sri Lanka), Suman was the son of Charles, a doctor, and his wife, Esme (nee De Mel). He attended Royal college in Colombo, then followed in the footsteps of his father and grandfather, who had both studied medicine in the UK. Studying at Cambridge University and University College hospital in London, he qualified in 1958.
After briefly returning to Ceylon to work in its only psychiatric hospital, on the outskirts of Colombo, he returned in 1960 to the UK, where the following year he married Frances Lefford, whom he had first met when they were students at University College hospital.
Working as an NHS psychiatrist at Chase Farm hospital in Enfield, north London, he became a fellow of the Royal College of Psychiatrists in the early 1970s, and in 1975 received an MD from the University of Cambridge based on his studies in transcultural psychiatry. He retired in 1997.
Suman remained deeply connected to his Sri Lankan heritage and supported many institutions and projects in the country, in particular the People’s Rural Development Association, which he played a key role in establishing in 2007. He was also a partner in the Trauma and Global Health programme organised by McGill University in Montreal, Canada, which brought valuable mental health training to Sri Lanka.
I first met Suman in Sri Lanka in the 90s, where we were both undertaking voluntary work. He was a kind, warm, humble and generous person who made time for everyone.
He is survived by Frances, his daughter, Siri, two grandsons, Nathan and Alec, his brother Sunimal and sister Susila.
US presidents who thought they could easily restrain Benjamin Netanyahu have quickly learned their lesson. “Who’s the fucking superpower?” Bill Clinton reportedly exploded after his first meeting with the Israeli prime minister.
Did Donald Trump make the same mistake? The state department quickly declared that the devastating overnight Israeli attack on Iran – which killed key military commanders and nuclear scientists as well as striking its missile capacity and a nuclear enrichment site – was unilateral. Mr Trump had reportedly urged Mr Netanyahu to hold off in a call on Monday, pending US talks with Iran over its nuclear programme due this weekend. The suspicion is that Israel feared that a deal might be reached and wanted to strike first. But Israeli officials have briefed that they had a secret green light from the US, with Mr Trump only claiming to oppose it.
Iran, reeling from the attack but afraid of looking too weak to retaliate, is unlikely to believe that the US did not acquiesce to the offensive, if unenthusiastically. It might suit it better to pretend otherwise – in the short term, it is not clear what ability it has to hit back at Israel, never mind taking on the US. But Mr Trump has made that hard by threatening “even more brutal attacks” ahead, urging Iran to “make a deal, before there’s nothing left” and claiming that “we knew everything”. Whether Israel really convinced Mr Trump that this was the way to cut a deal, or he is offering a post-hoc justification after being outflanked by Mr Netanyahu, may no longer matter.
Israel has become increasingly and dangerously confident of its ability to reshape the Middle East without pushing it over the brink. It believes that its previous pummellings of Hamas, Hezbollah and Iran’s air defences have created a brief opportunity to destroy the existential threat posed by the Iranian nuclear programme before it is too late. Russia is not about to ride to Tehran’s rescue, and while Gulf states don’t want instability, they are not distraught to see an old rival weakened.
But not least in the reckoning is surely that Mr Netanyahu, who survives politically through military action, only narrowly survived a Knesset vote this week. The government also faces mounting international condemnation over its war crimes in Gaza – though the US and others allow those crimes to continue. It is destroying the nation’s international reputation, yet may bolster domestic support through this campaign.
The obvious question is the future of a key Iranian enrichment site deep underground at Fordo, which many believe Israel could not destroy without US “bunker busters”. If Israel believes that taking out personnel and some infrastructure is sufficient to preclude Iran’s nuclear threat, that is a huge and perilous gamble. This attack may well trigger a rush to full nuclear-armed status by Tehran – and ultimately others – and risks spurring more desperate measures in the meantime. Surely more likely is that Israel hopes to draw in Washington, by persuading it that Iran is a paper tiger or baiting Tehran into attacking US targets.
“My proudest legacy will be that of a peacemaker and unifier,” Mr Trump claimed in his inaugural speech. Yet on Friday he said was not concerned about a regional war breaking out due to Israel’s strikes. Few will feel so sanguine. The current incoherence and incomprehensibility of US foreign policy fuels instability and risks drawing adversaries towards fateful miscalculations.
Do you have an opinion on the issues raised in this article? If you would like to submit a response of up to 300 words by email to be considered for publication in our letters section, please click here.
Donald Trump and Republicans in Washington on Friday cheered Israel for carrying out long-threatened strikes on Iran, but several Democrats accused that country’s prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, of deliberately sabotaging talks to resolve the question of Tehran’s nuclear program peacefully.
Iran has few friends within the American political establishment, while Israel retains widespread support in Congress, even as some Democrats publicly condemn its conduct in the war in Gaza. Republicans lined up behind the president in praising the attack, which seems certain to put an end to weeks of thus-far fruitless negotiations over Iran’s nuclear program.
“For too long, the mullahs in Iran have publicly aspired to wipe the only democracy in the Middle East off the face of the map via any means possible: funding and arming terror groups on Israel’s borders, choking off international sea lanes, and multiple barrages of missiles and drones,” said John Thune, the Republican Senate majority leader.
“Iran must never gain access to a nuclear weapon. Today, Israel has determined that it must take decisive action to defend the Israeli people.”
His counterpart in the House of Representatives, the speaker, Mike Johnson, echoed the sentiment, saying: “Israel decided it needed to take action to defend itself. They were clearly within their right to do so.”
Democrats’ sentiments towards the strikes were more complicated. Many in the party view Iran’s nuclear ambitions as an issue to be resolved through a multiparty agreement such as the one negotiated in 2015 during Barack Obama’s presidency. Trump pulled the US out of that deal during his first term, but backed renewed negotiations with Tehran upon starting his second earlier this year. In the interim, Joe Biden also tried to reach a new deal with Iran but was unsuccessful.
The attack unfolded at a particularly tense moment in the United States. Trump has ordered federalized national guard troops and US marines on to the streets of Los Angeles, saying they were necessary to safeguard immigration authorities. On Thursday, California’s Democratic senator Alex Padilla was handcuffed by federal agents after he tried to question the homeland security secretary, Kristi Noem, at a press conference. Both developments, Democrats say, are signs that Trump intends to govern as an authoritarian.
The US secretary of state, Marco Rubio, said American forces were not involved in the attack, and Trump on Friday said that Tehran had “perhaps, a second chance” to make a deal. But Democrats accused Netanyahu of ordering the strikes to ensure that the talks end for good, while simultaneously placing Americans in the Middle East at risk.
“Israel’s attack on Iran, clearly intended to scuttle the Trump administration’s negotiations with Iran, risks a regional war that will likely be catastrophic for America and is further evidence of how little respect world powers – including our own allies – have for President Trump,” said Chris Murphy, a Democratic senator who serves on the foreign relations committee.
“This is a disaster of Trump and Netanyahu’s own making, and now the region risks spiraling toward a new, deadly conflict” that he said “may be good for Netanyahu’s domestic politics, but it will likely be disastrous for both the security of Israel, the United States and the rest of the region.”
Sign up to This Week in Trumpland
A deep dive into the policies, controversies and oddities surrounding the Trump administration
after newsletter promotion
Tim Kaine, who also serves on the Senate foreign relations committee, said he “cannot understand why Israel would launch a pre-emptive strike at this juncture, knowing high-level diplomatic discussions between the United States and Iran are scheduled for this weekend. These talks are the only viable and sustainable path to curtailing Iran’s development of nuclear weapons and protecting US national security interests in the region.”
Mark Warner, the Democratic vice-chair of the Senate intelligence committee, avoided weighing in on Israel’s decision. “This is a rapidly evolving situation, and it’s critical that the United States works with our allies and avoid steps that will cause further escalation across the region. For years, Iran has threatened the safety of Israel and the region and Israel has an undeniable right to defend itself and its citizens,” he said.
Perhaps the most outspoken Democratic supporter of Israel in the Senate is Pennsylvania’s John Fetterman, who said on X: “Our commitment to Israel must be absolute and I fully support this attack. Keep wiping out Iranian leadership and the nuclear personnel. We must provide whatever is necessary – military, intelligence, weaponry – to fully back Israel in striking Iran.”
Responding to a post announcing that the head of Iran’s Revolutionary Guards, Gen Hossein Salam, had been killed, Fetterman wrote: “thank u, next.”
“We started in a terrace house back in 1971, when all the Asians were expelled from Uganda – we got bigger and bigger, and now we are many,” Dhiren Kanabar said of the Shree Hindu temple and community centre in Leicester, where he works.
The building at St Barnabas Road is testament to the growth and resilience of the city’s Gujarati community, who collected money, in their earliest days in the UK, to move from a makeshift place of worship – a family home in Cromford Street – to one of the first purpose-built Hindu temples in the UK.
On Friday, the day after the tragedy of Air India flight 171, in which a Boeing 787 Dreamliner crashed shortly after takeoff in Ahmedabad, in the Gujarat region of India, killing at least 265 people, sorrow descended on the temple. People came to light candles, find out how they could help, and take comfort in the speaker’s message of common universal humanity.
In this close-knit, British Gujarati community, everybody knows somebody affected. Relatives of Vishwash Kumar Ramesh, 40, the sole survivor, are active members. One of Vishwash’s brothers, Ajay Kumar Ramesh, is presumed dead.
“People, whenever they have time, in the evenings, and especially weekends, get together in prayer to the gods and goddesses,” Kanabar said. “But today, we are in mourning. It’s really tragic, really shocking.”
All over the UK, meetings of British Indians, Hindus, Gujaratis and their friends and neighbours have become impromptu vigils for the dead. In the North Evington district of Leicester, well-wishers clustered in the doorways of terraces, anxious for news about Vishwash and Ajay.
In this vibrant neighbourhood, crying could be heard from one house on Friday. Dozens of people stood quietly outside the property, which belongs to relatives of the brothers. Early in the afternoon, an inconsolable woman emerged, flanked by about a dozen other women, and was helped into a van – thought to be bound for an airport, then on to India.
There are about 800,000 British Gujaratis in the UK, many living in London, Lancashire and the East Midlands, including Hindus, Muslims, Jains and Christians. As speculation spread across communities, and news trickled out through news sites, broadcasters and social media, the National Council for Gujarati Organisations UK became a go-between for people who feared their loved ones were on the flight and authorities in Britain and India.
The organisation’s vice-president, Krishna Pujara, regularly travels on the Gatwick to Gujarat route, returning home from a visit to the region just last week. When news of the crash broke, she was deluged with calls from people who feared she was on the plane, as well as from those needing support, emergency visas and information.
The meeting Pujara holds every Friday in Enfield, north London, with members of the women’s charity Enfield Saheli, which she runs, this week became a place for women from the Gujarati, Bengali, Punjabi and Muslim communities to come together in solidarity.
They meditated before singing in prayer around tables lit with candles. “It’s not only about Gujaratis, we are a community that is united within the wider community,” Pujara said.
Onboard the flight was Vijay Rupani, a former chief minister of Gujarat. Pujara said she was due to attend a Father’s Day and religious celebration for him on Sunday, which has now been cancelled; his relatives have gone to India after obtaining emergency visas.
Sign up to First Edition
Our morning email breaks down the key stories of the day, telling you what’s happening and why it matters
after newsletter promotion
“We are a sisterhood here of all different community groups,” Pujara said. “When tragedy strikes everybody gets together.”
One member of the group, Manu Mistry, 78, said: “We feel very sorry about that plane crash, people who died, those who lost their loved ones. All our community, all our children, all our grandchildren, we are all sad. It’s horrible.”
Another, Mayadevi Shah, said her husband regularly travelled to his home town of Ahmedabad with Air India. After news of the tragedy, it was decided he no longer would. “He’s not going with this flight any more,” said Shah, adding he had returned as recently as last month. “Luckily, we don’t travel this month.”
Shah was among the women chanting in prayer for the victims and their families at the Saheli meeting. The previous day, she had been shocked to learn that a friend had lost her son, who was returning from India after visiting relatives.
“We read the name then we realised,” Shah said. “The news came and we were shocked. May their souls rest in peace and God give strength to them and their families. Om Shanti Shanti Shanti.”
Israel’s assault on Iran demonstrates a ruthless combination of air power and intelligence – and a significant disparity between the two countries in a conflict that is likely to be a long one if the goal is to eliminate Tehran’s nuclear capability.
Israel’s air force undertook waves of airstrikes, beginning at about 3am on Friday, aimed, briefings indicated, first at Iran’s military leaders and intelligence in Tehran, then switching to air defence batteries, missile launch sites and, above all, the critical facility at Natanz where uranium can be enriched to weapons grade.
The initial goal appears to have been to smash Iran’s military chain of command, with the killing of Maj Gen Mohammad Bagheri, the chief of staff of Iran’s military – and Gen Hossein Salami, the head of the Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps, killed alongside other senior members of the group.
Burcu Ozcelik, a research fellow at the Royal United Services Institute (Rusi), said the sheer scale of the attack “risks reshaping the strategic landscape of the Middle East” by targeting its military leadership and nuclear infrastructure.
“The sheer depth and precision of the strikes – reaching into the heart of Tehran and eliminating key figures such as Salami – underscore the extent of Israeli intelligence penetration and the degraded state of Iran’s air defence systems. For Tehran, this is not only a tactical loss but a profound strategic humiliation,” she added.
The immediate question is how much damage was done at Natanz, where Iran has conducted most of its nuclear enrichment at a site thought to be 8 metres underground, largely protected by reinforced concrete and hard rock. Videos showed black plumes emerging from the area of the site, but damage is impossible to assess.
Iran said the Natanz site had been hit, but there were no casualties, according to the semi-official Mehr news agency, while the International Atomic Energy Agency said it was still assessing the damage. Meanwhile, Israel’s military spokesperson, Effie Defrin, said the bombing had struck the underground area and related critical infrastructure. “We inflicted significant damage on this site,” he added.
At the same time, Israel’s external security service, the Mossad, claimed it had conducted a mixture of commando attacks, complete with grainy thermal video, and strikes from prepositioned drones – in the style of Ukraine’s recent attack on Russian airbases – aimed at Iranian air defence systems, including at Esfejabad airbase.
Some of the Mossad claims are likely to be propagandistic but the military reality is that so far there has been no sign of effective Iranian air defence or any reports of Israeli air force casualties. Israel appears to have a near total air superiority, allowing it to continue bombing into Friday with fresh attacks on Tabriz.
Iran’s initial response, Israel said, was to launch more than 100 drones at its attacker, all of which were shot down by mid morning. The drones are slow-moving, taking up to seven hours to travel the 700 miles or so between the countries – and it would take a far larger wave before even a handful hit the ground.
Tehran does have other military options, however. The most immediately dangerous is a store of up to 3,000 high-speed ballistic missiles, of which it used about 180 in its last attack on Israel in October 2024. Two dozen or so hit the Nevatim and Tel Nof airbases (where nuclear weapons are thought to be stored) in Israel and locations near the Mossad headquarters, but the damage done appears to have been relatively modest.
Sign up to Global Dispatch
Get a different world view with a roundup of the best news, features and pictures, curated by our global development team
after newsletter promotion
Initial reports suggested that Kermanshah in western Iran, home to ballistic missile launch sites buried inside canyons, was one of the early sites targeted. Successfully destroying or disabling underground sites is notoriously difficult, however, and the true impact will emerge only if Iran launches a missile counterattack with whatever is left at its military’s disposal.
Alternative possibilities may be cyber or terror attacks, though on a political level neither might feel like an equivalent retaliatory response, even if they are achievable – while strikes on American targets would be very risky for Tehran, bringing with it the possibility that the US, with all its firepower, would join the war.
But the option that is not on the table is to rely on traditional regional proxies. On Friday, Lebanon’s Hezbollah, its leadership eliminated during the two-month war with Israel last autumn, said it “will not initiate its own attack on Israel” in support of Iran. Yemen’s Houthis, attacked by Israel on Tuesday, are more than 1,000 miles distant and have only the ability to mount occasional ballistic missile attacks.
The complication for Israel is that Iran has had a long time to prepare, and its nuclear facilities are well defended. Until Friday afternoon, Israel did not try to attack a second enrichment facility at Fordow, buried 80-90 metres underground, beyond the capabilities of its most powerful known missiles, the 1.8-tonne Rocks and 1.6-tonne Air Lora.
Successfully attacking Natanz, according to an analysis from Rusi, “would likely require several impacts into the same crater to ‘burrow’ down to the facility and get a weapon through to explode within it successfully” – while the destruction of Fordow is considered feasible only with the US GBU 57/B “bunker buster” bomb, which, because it weighs nearly 14 tonnes and is 6 metres long, can be launched only from US B-2 bombers.
Such hardened targets, combined with Israel’s air dominance and extraordinary confidence, point to an extended military campaign against Iran – two weeks long, according to some reports – as well as a tense and uncertain international period, which, absent an Iranian capitulation, may not have an obvious end point.
Donald Trump is walking a tightrope as he claims that he was fully aware of Israel’s plans to launch massive airstrikes against Iran while continuing to distance the US from those strikes and deny Washington took any active role in the preparations.
The White House’s messaging has shifted quickly from Marco Rubio’s arms-length description of the Israeli attack as a “unilateral action”, to Trump claiming on Friday morning that he was fully in the loop on the operation and that it came at the end of a 60-day ultimatum he had given Iran to “make a deal” on its nuclear programme.
“Today is day 61,” he wrote on Truth Social. “I told [Iran] what to do, but they just couldn’t get there.”
Trump’s framing presents a good cop-bad cop dynamic of his approach with Benjamin Netanyahu, the embattled Israeli leader with whom he has a notoriously combative relationship. The US president has scrambled to now present the Israeli strikes, which he publicly claimed he did not want on Thursday, as a means of continuing his efforts to convince Iran to negotiate.
“They should now come to the table to make a deal before it’s too late,” he said.
But the discordant US response to the strikes, including Rubio’s Thursday evening statement, a hasty evacuation of some US personnel from the region and ambiguity over whether the US provided intelligence or would actively take part in Israel’s defence from a likely counterattack, has raised questions over whether Israel may have moved ahead of the Trump administration as a way to present Washington with a fait accompli.
“They made a bet on President Trump,” said Elliott Abrams, a former diplomat and senior fellow for Middle Eastern studies at the Council on Foreign Relations, suggesting that Israel had pushed harder for strikes while the Trump administration had sought to maintain a diplomatic route. “The Israelis struck and then today Trump called it ‘excellent’.”
While Israel had clearly given the United States advanced warning of the strike, claims that it was fully coordinated in Israeli state media have been subject to speculation: was Trump actually on board or was he repositioning himself on Friday in order to present the strikes as part of a coherent strategy.
On Thursday, in remarks from the White House’s East Room, Trump said that strikes on Israel could “blow up” his diplomatic efforts to negotiate with the Iranian leadership and said he “didn’t want them going in”. He defended his decision to begin evacuating personnel because a strike “could well happen”.
“The US started evacuating voluntarily non-essential personnel on Wednesday, barely 24 hours ahead of time, not enough time to really get people out of harm’s way,” said Rosemary Kelanic, the Middle East director for Defense Priorities, a thinktank that pushes for a more restrained US foreign policy. “So the question for me is what did the president know and when did he know it?”
On Friday, Trump told the Wall Street Journal that he was not caught unaware by the strike: “Heads-up? It wasn’t a heads-up. It was, we know what’s going on.” And he indicated that he had been apprised of future Israeli plans, writing that the “next already planned attacks” would be “even more brutal”.
Senior Israeli officials also began to brief media that Trump had only pretended to oppose an Israeli attack and that they in fact had a “green light” for the attack. But Kelanic and others noted that Israel may be seeking a means to “entrap” the US into a war.
In either case, it is doubtful that Israel could have prepared the attack in the past week without US knowledge.
Officials at the Defense Intelligence Agency and other intelligence agencies would have seen the preparations for the airstrike – involving more than 200 Israeli fighter jets striking more than 100 targets across Iran – and probably understood that Israel was planning a major attack against Tehran.
Late on Thursday, administration officials told Fox News that the US had replenished missiles for Israel’s Iron Dome anti-air batteries in recent weeks in preparation for an expected counterattack.
And the US in recent weeks had deployed B-52 bombers to its airbase on the remote Indian Ocean island of Diego Garcia, where multiple B-2 bombers have also been stationed since late March. B-2s stationed at the base took part in airstrikes on Houthi rebels in Yemen earlier this year, but the base would also serve as a launching point for airstrikes against Iran if the US were to join the conflict.
But there are other explanations for the resupply of anti-air missiles to Iron Dome, particularly following the unprecedented barrage of ballistic missiles launched by Iran against Israel last year.
And the US could have employed those B-2s and B-52s to strike the Fordow uranium enrichment centre, which is located deep underground and was not apparently struck in Friday morning’s strikes. Still intact, it represents an important element in Iran’s nuclear program that was not eliminated – at least in the first round of the Israeli attacks.
Iran and the US have stood at a crossroads in recent weeks. Down one path lay negotiations that, while difficult, promised benefits to the citizens of both countries. Down the other path, a protracted war that promised little more than destruction.
Back in 2018, Donald Trump had blocked the diplomatic path by tearing up the existing nuclear agreement with Iran – the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action. But since beginning his second term in January he has been surprisingly open to negotiations with Tehran. Iran’s supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, seemed ready to go along.
But the Israeli prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, has now decided for them in favor of the path of war, and despite initial hesitation, Trump now appears to be following him. Though uniquely positioned to rein in Netanyahu – more than any US president in decades – Trump has jumped on his bandwagon.
After entering office, Trump rightly pursued a deal that would offer Iran sanctions relief in return for an end to its nuclear weapons program. This deal would have served the interests of both parties. The risk of an Iranian nuclear breakout would have been greatly reduced, thus reducing pressure on other regional and global powers to pursue nuclear weapons themselves. Global energy markets would have benefited. The United States could have meanwhile pursued the drawdown of its military forces in the region, thus furthering a goal of every US president since Barack Obama. Improved US relations with Iran would also have helped to complicate Iran’s deepening ties to Russia and China.
But the Israeli government wanted none of this and has therefore spoiled the Trump administration’s negotiations. The Israeli government claims that Iran was days away from a bomb and that it had no choice but to attack. This is hard to believe. For years, experts, including the US intelligence community, have estimated it would take months if not years for Iran to not only produce enough highly enriched uranium but to also build a bomb with it. If this timeline had changed in recent days, the US would almost certainly have joined Israel in these strikes.
The strikes also will not end Iran’s nuclear program. The damage will be real, and military operations are ongoing, but Israel is ultimately only capable of destroying parts of Iran’s program. The destruction of the uranium enrichment facility at Natanz is a setback for Iran, but these facilities can be rebuilt. The assassination of Iran’s nuclear scientists is a blow, but their knowledge can also be replaced over time. History shows that so-called decapitation strikes can have a near-term effect, but they rarely work in the long term. Even if the United States now joins Israel in strikes, this will not eliminate Iran’s weapons program entirely without a regime change operation against Tehran. That strategy would repeat the tragic errors of the 2003 Iraq war, but on an even larger scale.
Iran’s nuclear weapons program will thus remain in some form. But hope of negotiations to control it is now badly damaged. The result is the worst of both worlds: a vengeful Iran even more determined to get nuclear weapons and no hope of negotiating a way out.
Marco Rubio, the US secretary of state, has wisely attempted to distance the United States from Israel’s attack. Trump, however, who initially tried to rein in Israel’s attack, has now tried to use it as leverage to get Tehran to sign up for his deal. Aligning America so closely with Israel at this juncture is only likely to draw the United States more deeply into the conflict and expose it to Iranian reprisals.
As a negotiating tactic it is also unlikely to work. The autocrats in Tehran cannot allow themselves to be visibly coerced into a deal lest it damage their domestic legitimacy. Some powerful Iranian officials moreover benefit from the status quo under sanctions, which have enriched a powerful few at the cost of the Iranian people.
Israel’s audacious move is another example of US partners seizing the strategic initiative from Trump. Israel’s strikes come on the heels of the decision by the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskyy, to strike deep into Russia with drones at the very moment the US was attempting to negotiate a ceasefire with Moscow.
With the US focused on the turmoil the Trump administration is whipping up domestically, and so much uncertainty about the trajectory of Trump’s global policy goals, other actors are probably going to do the same. Unless the administration can find the discipline and focus to get control over its own foreign policy, the United States risks getting dragged into more conflicts that will not serve the interests of the American people.
Chris Chivvis is a senior fellow and director of the American Statecraft Program at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace
Iran has vowed to avenge the attack on its nuclear sites and the assassination in Tehran of its senior military leadership, saying it would respond forcefully and that the “end of this story will be written by Iran’s hand”.
In the first signs of a counterstrike, Israel said Iran had launched 100 drones towards Israel and that its air defences were intercepting them outside Israeli territory.
Iraq said more than 100 Iranian drones had crossed its airspace and, soon after, neighbouring Jordan said its air force and defence systems intercepted several missiles and drones that had entered its airspace, for fear they would fall in its territory.
Iran, in serious military disarray, denied it had launched any drones and claimed its counterstrike had not been launched.
Responding to what amounted to the most serious and largest ever attack by Israel, the country’s supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, threatened “severe punishment” and claimed residential areas had been targeted.
The Iranian leadership vowed a military and diplomatic response, saying women and children had been killed in the strikes across Iran. The Fars news agency claimed 78 people had been killed and more than 300 injured in Tehran province alone. A vast swathe of Iran’s military and air force leadership has been wiped out, and as many as six scientists working on Iran’s nuclear programme.
It remains to be seen if Iran will decide to attack US military sites in the Middle East, but its leaders will have heard Donald Trump praising Israel’s actions and claiming the US had known about the attacks in advance, even if it did not take part.
Iran also faces a decision on whether to accept Trump’s offer to continue with the bilateral talks on a diplomatic solution to its nuclear programme. The sixth round of Oman-brokered talks involving the US special envoy Steve Witkoff were due to be held in Muscat on Sunday.
Iran’s foreign minister, Abbas Araghchi, did not announce that the talks had been ended by the Israeli strike. Instead he said Israel had crossed every red line, accused Israel of a declaration of war, and called for an emergency meeting of the UN security council in New York. The head of the International Atomic Energy Agency, Rafael Grossi, told the council that the above-ground pilot enrichment plant at Iran’s main nuclear facility in Natanz had been been destroyed, although he said the level of radioactivity outside the plant remained unchanged.
Iranian officials dismissed Trump’s suggestion that Tehran should have expected an attack since a 60-day deadline the US president claimed he had set for the talks had expired.
In a furious statement, the Iranian government accused Israel of terrorism and insisted the attack demonstrated it “does not adhere to any international rules or laws and, like a drunkard, openly and brazenly engages in terror and ignites the flames of war before the eyes of the world, including westerners who claim to uphold human rights and international law”.
“Starting a war with Iran is playing with the lion’s tail,” the statement added.
In a telling warning that the Iranian regime, if it survives, may now indeed feel the need to try to assemble a nuclear bomb in the face of Israel’s attacks, the statement further said: “The world now better understands Iran’s insistence on the right to enrichment, nuclear technology and missile power, and the enemy has made it possible to prove our injustice and righteousness, who is the aggressor and which regime is threatening the security of the region.”
Hardline MPs called on the supreme leader to lift the fatwa that is supposed to prevent Iran pursuing a nuclear programme. With its axis of resistance weakened over the past year by Israel’s actions, there has been a growing lobby arguing that Iran needs a nuclear bomb to defend itself.
Among those killed by Israeli strikes were Gen Hossein Salami, the commander-in-chief of the Revolutionary Guards; Gen Gholamali Rashid, a senior Revolutionary Guards commander; the nuclear scientist Mohammad Mehdi Tehranchi; and Fereydoun Abbasi, the former head of Iran’s Atomic Energy Organization.
Replacements for two of the top roles were announced within hours of the attack. Maj Gen Abdolrahim Mousavi was appointed as chief of staff of the armed forces, replacing Maj Gen Mohammad Bagheri, who was killed in the Israeli attack. Khamenei chose Mohammad Pakpour to lead the paramilitary Revolutionary Guards, replacing Salami, state television reported.
Residential buildings across Tehran were hit. Pictures showed that specific floors on high-rise apartments were struck, but the damage had spread to many different floors.
Army barracks across the country appear to have been hit, with reports of deaths and damage. But Isfahan regional governors said there had been no leakage of uranium from the Natanz nuclear facility.
No electricity or oil installations were struck, but Israel may well return to hit economic targets in the coming days, depending on any Iranian response. It has also not sought to assassinate any of Iran’s political or diplomatic leadership.
Iran, aware that the savage blow to its prestige may lead to some form of uprising, urged its citizens to listen only to official channels, and ignore rumours.
The planned sixth round of talks, the first in which both sides had put forward proposals in writing, were to focus on whether Iran would be allowed to continue domestic uranium enrichment with monitoring by the UN nuclear watchdog the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).
Iran says it does not have a covert plan to build a nuclear bomb, but all signatories to the nuclear non-proliferation treaty including Iran have a sovereign right to enrich uranium for civilian purposes.
It says the comprehensive report put to the IAEA board this week showed no evidence that Iran was close to building a nuclear weapon. The report did say it could not be certain that the nuclear programme was entirely civilian in purpose. Tehran has consistently argued that its increased stockpiles of highly enriched uranium is a calculated and legitimate response to Donald Trump unilaterally withdrawing in 2018 from the nuclear deal agreed with Barack Obama three years earlier and imposing economic sanctions.
The highly experienced Iranian negotiating team were aware that Israel was increasingly worried that Trump, facing an open war for his ear on Iran in Washington, might strike an unsatisfactory deal with Iran. But the consensus among Arab diplomats was that Trump was sincere in saying he did not want Israel to strike.
The belief among Iranian negotiators that they had further time before Trump implicitly or explicitly sanctioned military action looks, in retrospect, to have been a severe error. But the right to enrich has been an Iranian red line for decades, and they will reject the accusation they overplayed a weak hand.
Moreover, Iranian diplomats had been led to believe initially that the US would permit Iran to continue some form of uranium enrichment, but had been struggling to convert that belief into a specific American offer in the talks held in Oman and Rome. Iran will now have to reflect whether it was being played by the US negotiators, or whether Israel has the freedom of action to mount such an assault without a green light from Washington.
To many Iranian eyes, despite the reports that Trump was distancing himself from Israel, the US president has done little in practice since taking office to restrain Israel either in Gaza or across the region.
Iran’s air defences have proved ineffective, partly due to the previous airstrikes launched by Israel in October that took out Russian-made air defence systems, including around its nuclear sites.
One of the few cards Iran has to play is that in recent months it has managed to improve its fractured relations with Arab states in the region, even though its policy of forward defence based on proxy groups in Lebanon, Palestine, Syria, Yemen and Iraq was largely dismantled by Israel. But the valued Gulf state sympathy for Iran is not likely to extend to joint military action against Israel.
As dawn broke over Tehran, firefighters and other rescue workers saw for the first time the full extent of the damage done by overnight Israeli strikes.
Among the first locations reached by responders in the capital was a 12-storey block of flats looming above a road junction and a shopping mall in the northern suburbs. A huge blast at around 4am had gutted two upper levels, showering debris into the street below.
It soon became clear why this particular floor on this particular block had been selected by Israeli military planners. It was the home of Ali Shamkhani, one of the country’s most senior security officials and a close aide of the supreme leader, Ali Khamenei.
Initial reports said Shamkhani, who is also a key negotiator in ongoing indirect talks with the US over Iran’s nuclear programme, was injured. But by mid-morning it was announced that the 69 year old had been killed.
By then, it was clear that Israel’s attack was on a much greater scale than anyone had previously envisaged. Dozens of other targets in and around Tehran had been hit by warplanes. Across the capital, buildings were burning, with gaping blackened holes where flats had existed hours before.
Other top officials had been killed in this first wave of strikes, including Mohammad Bagheri, the chief of staff of Iran’s armed forces, and Maj Gen Hossein Salami, the head of the powerful Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps, who died in an attack on the IRGC’s headquarters.
Other casualties included officials in charge of Iran’s nuclear programme and its ballistic missile arsenal, including two well-known scientists. There were reports of further deaths and injuries, possibly among members of the dead men’s families, though no confirmed numbers.
Golnar, a resident of Saadat Abad, northern Tehran, was asleep when blasts woke her just after 3am.
“I woke up to the first explosion and rushed to the windows to check. Then minutes later I heard four explosions back to back … The windows were shaking and people in the building started screaming,” Golnar told the Guardian.
“We knew from social media that tensions were heightened between Israel and the regime, but we were not told by the authorities that we must prepare. Everything happened so quickly. We were scrambling for information on whether this was an attack or a natural disaster,” she said.
A human rights activist living near Shahr Ara Street in Tehran described “total chaos in the residential areas”.
“Traffic jams and clueless crowds are still trying to make sense of what’s happening,” they said. “Smoke is still billowing from residential streets and there’s debris around homes. The sky is red and we fear there will be more attacks,” they said.
Elsewhere in Iran, people were also waking up to destruction.
Drivers could see plumes of oily black smoke pouring from the major nuclear facility of Natanz, 200 miles (320km) south of Tehran. Residents of the north-western city of Tabriz ran for shelter as several targets were hit. Others cowered as missiles slammed into a suspected nuclear site in the central city of Arak and amid blasts at air defence missile bases in Kermanshah, close to the border with Iraq.
There were strikes in Hamadan province, where a long-range radar facility appeared to have been badly damaged; and at Piranshahr, in West Azerbaijan Province, a launch site for ballistic missiles was hit.
For many Iranians, often unaware they are living next to critical military or nuclear infrastructure, the attacks prompted great fear.
Among those opposed to the regime, the attacks prompted excitement, even jubilation.
An emergency unit doctor in Tehran said mid-morning that no civilian casualties had been brought into his hospital so far.
“Some of us in the emergency units have to cancel any planned leaves, and hospitals have been put on high alert. My elderly father woke up to loud explosions in western Tehran. He called me with a trembling voice, and for the past six months we have lived in fear that tensions will escalate,” the doctor said.
Israel has said the attacks were just the opening salvo of a much broader offensive, which could continues for days, or even weeks.
“We are already dealing with a dire economic crisis,” the human rights activist said. “We are stocking up on food and supplies which are already expensive. Where do we even flee to if attacked again today? We don’t have bomb shelters like the Israelis do and we can’t flee to Iraq or Afghanistan. We are stuck.”
Azadeh, a resident of Vanak, said everyday Iranians had not asked for this war.
“Around 3.40am, the explosion sounds started getting louder and louder. It got very frightening. There were loud screams across the streets. The explosion was near the main square which is scary.
“However, [after] the news that IRGC commanders were killed and not civilians, some of us are happy about it. The mullahs are responsible for any civilian deaths that may occur this time,” Azadeh said.
Though images of the aftermath of strikes suggested there were at least some casualties among the families and neighbours of targeted individuals, the overall death toll was unclear. Iranian state media were reported to have given an unofficial total of at least 78 people killed and more than 300 injured in Tehran.
Iran’s Atomic Energy Organisation said most of the damage from strikes targeting its Natanz facility was at ground level and there had been “no casualties” there.
Some analysts say the attacks will prompt people to rally behind the regime, but others argue that Iran’s inability to either protect its own senior officials and infrastructure or, so far, strike back effectively will damage its credibility among the wider population.
None of the 100 armed drones reportedly launched by Iran at Israel on Friday reached their targets, Israeli officials said. Iran’s state news agency denied any such attempted attack.
Journalists in Iran told the Guardian they had been instructed not to share any news, images and videos on social media by the authorities, and editors had been warned off reposting phone footage from witnesses to the strikes.
“The only videos shared should be [emphasising] how devastating Israel’s attacks were on the innocent people,” said a reporter in Karaj, west of Tehran. “The problem with this is, there are no ground reports for now that civilians were killed or seriously injured. The [authorities] don’t want to look weak in front of radical supporters. Only the state media’s assigned reporters are allowed on the explosion sites.”
Israel has said its attack was essential because Iran was on the brink of acquiring nuclear weapons capability. Iran has repeatedly denied such intentions, saying it wants nuclear energy only for civilian purposes, and has publicly rejected Washington’s demand to scrap enrichment, describing it as an attack on its national sovereignty.
The Israeli prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, said he hoped the attacks would trigger the downfall of Iran’s theocracy, and that his message to the Iranian people was that Israel’s fight was not with them, but with the “brutal dictatorship that has oppressed you for 46 years”.
Khamenei said in a statement after the first strikes that Israel had “unleashed its wicked and bloody” hand in a crime against Iran and that it would face “a bitter fate”.
The human rights activist in Tehran said ordinary people would “bear the consequences of anything that happens in the next hours and days”.
A student who was booked on the Air India flight to London Gatwick that crashed on Thursday missed boarding the plane by 10 minutes due to traffic.
Bhoomi Chauhan, a Bristol-based business administration student, was on holiday in western India and had booked to travel home on flight AI171.
However, the 28-year-old was turned away by airline staff after arriving at Ahmedabad airport less than an hour before the flight was due to depart.
The plane crashed into a medical college shortly after takeoff, killing 241 people onboard. A British man, Vishwash Kumar Ramesh, was the sole survivor. At least five medical students were also killed and about 50 injured, and there are fears the number of people killed on the ground could rise.
Chauhan had checked in online and was assigned the economy-class seat 36G. She arrived at the airport at 12.20pm local time, 10 minutes after boarding was scheduled to start.
She told the BBC’s Gujarati service: “We got very angry with our driver and left the airport in frustration … I was very disappointed. We left the airport and stood at a place to drink tea and after a while, before leaving … we were talking to the travel agent about how to get a refund for the ticket. There, I got a call that the plane had gone down.”
The student said it was a miracle that she had missed her flight, having been caught in traffic in Ahmedabad city centre after travelling from Ankleshwar, about 120 miles south of Ahmedabad.
She said: “When I missed the flight, I was dejected. [The] only thing that I had in mind was: if I had started a little early, I would have boarded the plane. I requested airline staff to allow me inside as I am only 10 minutes [late]. I told them that I am the last passenger and so please allow me to board the plane, but they did not allow me.”
Investigations are continuing into the cause of the crash, the first involving a Boeing 787 Dreamliner.
The Foreign Office said any British nationals requiring consular assistance or who had concerns about family or friends should call 020 7008 5000.
Benjamin Netanyahu must be stopped. The Israeli prime minister’s lust for war as a solution to his myriad problems is nothing short of a threat to us all, one that extends far beyond Israel’s neighbors. Netanyahu knows no other way. War is his doctrine. War is his reflex. War is his answer. He believes the power of war will unite Israeli society and will stifle any American criticism of him, necessary since the machinery he needs to make his wars comes mostly from Washington. And, with his aggression against Iran, he seeks to drag the United States further into another endless military quagmire in the region and light the world on fire.
Early on Friday morning, Israel launched a series of unprovoked strikes against Iran, targeting Iran’s nuclear energy facilities, its top scientists, its military commanders, and parts of its military and civilian infrastructure. Television images show a residential building in Tehran damaged by what looks like a missile attack. Iran, which has not suffered an assault this severe since its war with Iraq in the 1980s, is reporting at least 70 people killed and 320 injured thus far. Meanwhile, Israel’s genocidal campaign in Gaza continues out of the public eye, as an internet blackout halted most aid operations.
Netanyahu argues that the Israeli attack on Iran was a “pre-emptive strike” against a clandestine nuclear weapons program. But that’s simply a lie. A “pre-emptive” strike requires an imminent threat of invasion or military force. Iran was not imminently about to attack Israel, with or without a nuclear weapon. What Israel engaged in last night was better described by its defense minister as a “preventive” strike against an opponent’s infrastructure.
Regardless of what you think about Iran’s nuclear energy program, about the status of negotiations with the United States regarding its nuclear program, or about recent pressure the International Atomic Energy Agency has brought on Iran, a preventive strike by Israel against a sovereign nation is a blatant act of aggression. It is fundamentally illegal under international law and will further erode the prospect of sovereign states living in peace and security with each other.
Iran has long claimed that it is only pursuing a civilian nuclear energy program and has no ambition to make a nuclear weapon. That might also be a lie, but who would blame them for wanting such a deterrent now? It’s widely understood that North Korea’s nuclear arsenal effectively functions as a deterrent against an American attack, after all.
Israel, which is believed to have about 90 nuclear warheads and enough plutonium for many more, refuses to sign the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT), the only country in the region to do so. That refusal has also made the long desired goal of a nuclear-free Middle East impossible.
And anyway, there’s always been something deeply racist about which country is or is not permitted to develop nuclear weapons. In a briefing paper, the Nobel prize-winning International Campaign to Abolish Nuclear Weapons states that “racism is ingrained in nuclear weapons history and doctrine”, and that non-western states are regarded “as ‘irrational’, ‘emotional’ and somehow ‘less capable’ of negotiating a Treaty than Western governments”. Let’s remember that the United States is the only country to use a nuclear weapon. Twice. As the briefing paper points out, the US “public widely supported the bombing partly due to anti-Japanese racism, depicting Japanese people in subhuman terms, in some cases fit for extermination”.
Netanyahu needs his external enemies to survive his internal divisions. A day before launching this aggression on Iran, his coalition barely survived a vote to dissolve parliament. (The issue driving the vote was the compulsory military service of ultra-Orthodox men.) As war with Iran has now become a very real possibility, talks about his fragile coalition will recede. This is the same Netanyahu who propped up Hamas for years to thwart the establishment of a Palestinian state. This is the same Netanyahu who broke the ceasefire in Gaza in March of this year. This is the same Netanyahu who, in the latest negotiations about a ceasefire in Gaza, reportedly won’t even agree to Hamas relinquishing power in Gaza, so dependent is he on creating and maintaining external enemies for his own survival.
Is Donald Trump getting dragged into a war of Netanyahu’s making or is he willingly joining a partnership of aggressors? Netanyahu has said the US knew about the attack in advance, but even if the US is sleepwalking its way into war, the prospect of another US-sponsored conflagration is a terrible one (and certainly won’t get Trump his much-desired Nobel peace prize). If there is one thing the people of this region do not need, it is more war, the effects of which could also reverberate terribly around Europe and the rest of the world.
Where are the European leaders now? Will Keir Starmer, Emmanuel Macron, and Friedrich Merz stand up to Netanyahu and Trump? Will they use some real power to reject Netanyahu’s warmaking barbarism, based as it is on naked domination, supremacy, violence and conquest, or will we hear only vague and useless platitudes about “restraint” after the fact? Western European leaders constantly talk about how much they value peace, justice, equality and the rule of law. Now is the time to put those words into practice.
Moustafa Bayoumi is a Guardian US columnist
Oh how do I hear you Arwa Mahdawi (Strangers on the street: please stop asking me if my wife is my twin sister, 11 June). All my out life (40-plus years), random strangers have found it possible to ask me the most intrusive questions – ones that they would never ask a heterosexual.
A couple of recent examples: last week on holiday in Southwold we had dinner in our hotel. The lovely waitperson asked if we were in the same room when I gave our room number, so we then listened carefully. Nope, none of the heterosexuals arounds us got asked. A couple of weeks previously the guy delivering our biomass pellets asked if I was my partner’s mum. That one really stung – she is 60 to my 64! Many years ago (different girlfriend), we got asked the twin question; we never had sex again.
Sorry, Arwa, you’ve got this for life – unless the hets get the memo from the Office of Homosexual Affairs.Liz WillowsBrain’s Green, Gloucestershire
 Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication in our letters section.
Canada and India plan to share intelligence in an effort to combat the rising threat of international crime and extremism, according to a new report from Bloomberg, days before a meeting between the two countries’ leaders.
Canadian officials declined to comment on the report, which, if confirmed, would represent a dramatic shift in relations between the two countries which for nearly two years have been locked in a bitter diplomatic spat after Canada’s federal police agency concluded that India planned and ordered the murder a prominent Sikh activist on Canadian soil.
Under the intelligence-sharing deal, which is expected to be announced during the G7 summit in Canada later this week, police from both countries will increase cooperation on transnational crime, terrorism and extremist activities. Canada has reportedly pushed for more work on investigations into extrajudicial killings.
Earlier this month, Canada’s prime minister, Mark Carney, was forced to defend his decision to invite the Indian prime minister, Narendra Modi, to the G7 summit in Alberta after Canada’s federal police said the shooting death of Hardeep Singh Nijjar was orchestrated by the “highest levels” of the Indian government.
Carney said there was a “legal process that is literally under way and quite advanced in Canada”, following questions over his decision to invite Modi. Four Indian nationals living in Canada have been charged with Nijjar’s murder.
Carney also cited India’s status as the “fifth largest economy in the world, the most populous country in the world and central to supply chains”. But the decision did not sit well with lawmakers from British Columbia. A member of Carney’s Liberal caucus, Sukh Dhaliwal, met with the prime minister earlier this the week to express concern over the invitation.
“We as Canadians take pride to be a champion on human rights. We are the country of law and justice,” Dhaliwal, who represents the electoral district where Nijjar was killed, told the Canadian Press. “When it comes to protecting fundamental rights and serving justice for the victim, it is non-negotiable.”
Dhaliwal said that the prime minister was “alarmed about the issue” and would be “very strong in dealing” with the issue when speaking to his Indian counterpart.
Ever since former prime minister Justin Trudeau accused India of orchestrating the high-profile assassination of Nijjar, Ottawa and New Delhi have been locked in a worsening feud over the issue.
India temporarily stopped issuing in visas in Canada and, soon after, Canada expelled six senior diplomats, including the high commissioner, Sanjay Verma. India retaliated by ordering the expulsion of six high-ranking Canadian diplomats, including the acting high commissioner.
“The Indian government made a horrific mistake in thinking that they could interfere as aggressively as they did in the safety and sovereignty of Canada,” Trudeau told a public inquiry into foreign interference, adding that Canada had not wanted to “blow up” its valuable relationship with India. But he said after Nijjar was killed, “we had clear and certainly now ever clearer indications that India had violated Canada’s sovereignty”.
The Bloomberg report, which underscores Carney’s attempts to mend relations with powerful nations, follows revelations that a suspected Indian government agent was surveilling former New Democratic party leader Jagmeet Singh as part of its network of coercion and intimidation.
According to Global News, the person, with suspected ties to both the Indian government and the Lawrence Bishnoi gang implicated in Nijjar’s death, knew Singh’s daily routines, travel plans and family. When the RCMP realized there was a credible thread to this life, they placed the federal party leader under police protection.
“India targeted a Canadian politician on Canadian soil. That’s absolutely unprecedented. As far as we’re concerned, that’s an act of war,” Balpreet Singh, a spokesperson for the World Sikh Organization, said after of the Global News report. “If Jagmeet Singh isn’t safe … what does it mean for the rest of us?”
Fiona Hill’s assessment of the Russian threat to Britain is a classic example of how a seemingly rational argument based on a false premise and scanty evidence can lead to a mad conclusion (Russia is at war with Britain and US is no longer a reliable ally, UK adviser says, 6 June). It is especially alarming that this conclusion was reached by one of the three principal authors of the recent strategic defence review.
The false premise is that Vladimir Putin’s invasion of Ukraine is the first step to make Russia “a dominant military power in all of Europe”. Evidence that Britain is already under attack is provided by “the poisonings, assassinations, sabotage operations … cyber-attacks and influence operations ... sensors … around critical pipelines, efforts to butcher undersea cables”. It follows that Britain’s economy and society must be geared up to resist the Russian menace. Deny the premise and the argument for a “whole society” mobilisation against Russia collapses. What it reveals is the strength of the warmongering mood of official Britain.
This is not to deny that we have to take precautions against the real danger of a significant US pullout, perhaps amounting to rendering article 5 of the Nato treaty meaningless, and that the Russians can be quite ruthless in exploiting an advantage if they think they have one. But this is a far cry from proposing, as the strategic defence review does, a national mobilisation in face of an immediate and pressing Russian threat.Robert Skidelsky Emeritus professor of political economy, Warwick University, Richard Balfe Former MEP, Anthony Brenton British ambassador to Russia, 2004-08, Thomas Fazi Author and journalist, Anatol Lieven Senior fellow, Quincy Institute for Responsible Statesmanship, Ian Proud Senior diplomat, British embassy, Moscow, 2014-18, Geoffrey Roberts Professor, University College Cork, Richard Sakwa Emeritus professor of Russian and east European studies, University of Kent, Brigitte Granville Professor of international economics and economic policy, Queen Mary University of London
 Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication in our letters section.
The timing of Israel’s plan to attack Iran was top-secret. But Washington pizza delivery trackers guessed something was up before the first bombs fell.
About an hour before Iranian state TV first reported loud explosions in Tehran, pizza orders around the Pentagon went through the roof, according to a viral X account claiming to offer “hot intel” on “late-night activity spikes” at the US military headquarters.
“As of 6:59 pm ET nearly all pizza establishments nearby the Pentagon have experienced a HUGE surge in activity,” the account Pentagon Pizza Report posted on Thursday.
Not confining its analysis to pizza, the account noted three hours later that a gay bar near the Pentagon had “abnormally low traffic for a Thursday night”, and said this probably pointed to “a busy night at the Pentagon”.
While far from scientific, the Pentagon pizza theory “is not something the internet just made up”, the Takeout, an online site covering restaurants and food trends, noted earlier this year.
Pentagon-adjacent pizza joints also got much busier than usual during Israel’s 2024 missile strike on Iran, it said, as there are “a multitude of fast food restaurants in the Pentagon complex, but no pizza places”.
Pizza deliveries to the Pentagon reportedly doubled right before the US invasion of Panama in December 1989, and surged again before Operation Desert Storm in 1991.
Donald Trump told the Wall Street Journal he was fully aware in advance of the bombing campaign, which Israel says is needed to end Iran’s nuclear program. “We know what’s going on.”
For the rest of Americans, pepperoni pie activity was not the only way to tell something was about to happen.
Washington had already announced it was moving some diplomats and their families out of the Middle East on Wednesday.
And close to an hour before Israel unleashed its firepower on Iran, the US ambassador in Jerusalem, Mike Huckabee, sent out a rather revealing X post: “At our embassy in Jerusalem and closely monitoring the situation. We will remain here all night. ’Pray for the peace of Jerusalem!’”
This is a war 30 years in the making. Benjamin Netanyahu was talking about the threat of an Iranian nuclear bomb back in the 1990s and he has scarcely let up since. For decades he has believed that a nuclear Iran would represent the one truly existential threat to Israel and that military force is the only sure way to prevent it. Several times during the many years in which Netanyahu has sat in the prime minister’s chair, an all-out strike on Iran’s nuclear facilities has been weighed up, debated and planned for. In the early hours of this morning, it finally happened.
Netanyahu will be pleased with the early results, including the elimination of key Iranian military commanders and nuclear scientists. But the ultimate consequences could look very different. By his actions, he may only have accelerated the very danger he has feared for so long.
It’s not hard to see why Israel’s PM struck and struck now. The motive remains the same as it ever was, with Netanyahu’s statement overnight invoking the darkest chapter in Jewish history to insist that Israel would never allow itself to be vulnerable to a “nuclear holocaust”. But the timing was down, in part, to the fact that the Iranian regime is in a state of strategic weakness.
Its power in the region long rested on the allies and proxies it could call on, forming a “ring of fire” around the Israeli enemy: the Assad regime in Syria, Hezbollah in Lebanon, Hamas in Gaza and the Houthis in Yemen, to say nothing of pro-Iranian militias in Iraq. Now Assad is gone and Syria’s new leader, embraced by Donald Trump, is looking to Washington rather than Tehran. As for the three Hs, the Houthis have reached an agreement with the US; Hezbollah is leaderless and still reeling from last year’s Israeli onslaught, leaving the Iraqi militias who once co-ordinated with it weakened in turn; and Hamas has seen Israel wipe out its leadership and all but destroy Gaza. More directly, Israel’s response to Iran’s missile and drone strikes on the country in April and October of 2024 left Iran’s air defence system crippled. If the best time to kick a man is when he’s down, now, concluded Israel’s war planners, was the time to move.
As for this specific moment, there was a helpful bit of context, if not exactly a pretext, provided by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). On Thursday the nuclear watchdog found Iran in violation of its non-proliferation obligations for the first time in almost 20 years.
And, as always with Netanyahu, domestic politics played a part: on Wednesday he warded off a threat to his coalition by warning one unhappy smaller party that the Iranian threat meant that now was not the time for a dissolution and early elections.
What may have loomed especially large in Netanyahu’s calculations was the meeting scheduled for Sunday in Oman between Trump’s personal envoy, Steve Witkoff, and his Iranian counterpart, their sixth such encounter. Did the Israeli PM fear a breakthrough in those talks that would have seen Trump agree a deal much like the one signed by the Obama administration a decade ago, an arrangement that would have allowed Iran to keep enriching uranium in a way acceptable to the US but unacceptable to Israel? Netanyahu managed to persuade Trump in 2018 to break from the Obama-era agreement, helped by the fact Trump likes nothing more thanto dismantle the legacy of a predecessor. But a revived deal with Trump’s signature on it? That had to be prevented by whatever means necessary.
On this reading, Netanyahu has just defied the will of his biggest patron, the US, and done it brazenly. Supporting that view is the pointed statement by the US secretary of state, Marco Rubio, that Israel’s action was “unilateral” and that “We are not involved in strikes against Iran.” That would certainly fit with Trump’s own words just a few hours before Israel’s assault had begun. “I’d love to avoid a conflict,” the president said, explaining that the US and Iran were “fairly close” to making a deal. “As long as I think there is an agreement I don’t want [the Israelis] going in because I think that would blow it.”
And yet, look at what Trump said next. “It might help it actually,” he mused, hinting that an Israeli attack could concentrate the Iranians’ minds in negotiations, nudging them towards saying yes rather than no. And note how Trump has reacted to the Israeli assault once it got under way.
“I think it’s been excellent,” he told ABC News on Friday morning. “We gave [the Iranians] a chance and they didn’t take it. They got hit hard, very hard … And there’s more to come. A lot more.”
Perhaps that’s all front, Trump preferring to save face – and claim credit – than to admit Israel defied his wishes. But we know how Trump talks when he thinks he’s been disrespected. And so far there’s been no sign of that. Coupled with Trump’s promise to defend Israel from Iranian retaliation, it adds to the possibility that the Oman talks may even have been a pre-agreed ruse to hoodwink Tehran, that the US is no mere observer of this war and that it could get drawn further into it.
Which brings us to the question that matters more than either the motive or timing of this Israeli action: is it wise? Some will look at the region and think Israel has miscalculated, that some of the Arab states which quietly came to its aid against Iran a year ago will be reluctant to do that now. That may be to mistake public anger for private satisfaction. As the Economist’s Middle East correspondent puts it, “plenty of people in the Middle East are happy to see Iran hit … Lebanese, Syrians, Yemenis who suffered for years because of the Islamic republic are glad to see it bloodied.”
Others will note that the attack may have been spectacular, especially in its elimination of several key individuals, but that, if its ultimate aim is the prevention of an Iranian bomb, it is still bound to fail. The IAEAg has confirmed that the Natanz site was hit, but analysts explain that the business end of that installation is so deep in the ground, it is beyond the reach of conventional Israeli firepower. The same goes for the site at Fordow, concealed inside a mountain. It would require US “bunker-buster” bombs to hit those, and even they might not be able to do it.
But there is a less concrete reason why Operation Rising Lion might ultimately prove futile. Surely Iran’s hardliners will now become more, not less, determined to acquire a nuclear weapon. They will have learned what might be called the North Korea lesson. After the Iraq war, Libya opted to abandon its nuclear programme. Not many years later, the Libyan dictator, Muammar Gaddafi, was dead in a ditch. Ukraine too gave up its nuclear bombs, only to be invaded by its neighbour. Meanwhile, the dictator dynasty in Pyongyang made the opposite move: they held on to their nukes, and no one has ever laid a finger on them.
That logic is bleak but compelling and seems to be hardening in Tehran. Witness today’s statement from the Iranian government that “The world now better understands Iran’s insistence on the right to enrichment, nuclear technology and missile power.” That sounds like doubling down.
Even if the Iranians are somehow thwarted, the lesson will not be lost on the neighbourhood. Saudi Arabia and Turkey will not want to place themselves in Israel’s crosshairs by pursuing a nuclear programme, but nor will they want to be Libya or Ukraine. Despite the risks, they might conclude that it’s better to be North Korea. A nuclear weapon will only become more desirable. And a tinderbox region that is already the most unstable in the world will become more dangerous still.
So yes, Netanyahu can look forward to fighting the next Israeli election as the man who humbled Israel’s archenemy. It will play well. But with this move he may well have brought the nightmare prospect of a nuclear Middle East one step closer. That’s a peril for his country – and the world.
Jonathan Freedland is a Guardian columnist
Do you have an opinion on the issues raised in this article? If you would like to submit a response of up to 300 words by email to be considered for publication in our letters section, please click here.
On 1 May 1925, with Benito Mussolini already in power, a group of Italian intellectuals publicly denounced his fascist regime in an open letter. The signatories – scientists, philosophers, writers and artists – took a stand in support of the essential tenets of a free society: the rule of law, personal liberty and independent thinking, culture, art and science. Their open defiance against the brutal imposition of the fascist ideology – at great personal risk – proved that opposition was not only possible, but necessary. Today, 100 years later, the threat of fascism is back – and so we must summon that courage and defy it again.
Fascism emerged in Italy a century ago, marking the advent of modern dictatorship. Within a few years, it spread across Europe and the world, taking different names but maintaining similar forms. Wherever it seized power, it undermined the separation of powers in the service of autocracy, silenced opposition through violence, took control of the press, halted the advancement of women’s rights and crushed workers’ struggles for economic justice. Inevitably, it permeated and distorted all institutions devoted to scientific, academic and cultural activities. Its cult of death exalted imperial aggression and genocidal racism, triggering the second world war, the Holocaust, the death of tens of millions of people and crimes against humanity.
At the same time, the resistance to fascism and the many other fascist ideologies became a fertile ground for imagining alternative ways of organising societies and international relations. The world that emerged from the second world war – with the charter of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the theoretical foundations of the EU and the legal arguments against colonialism – remained marked by deep inequalities. Yet, it represented a decisive attempt to establish an international legal order: an aspiration toward global democracy and peace, grounded in the protection of universal human rights, including not only civil and political, but also economic, social and cultural rights.
Fascism never vanished, but for a time it was held at bay. However, in the past two decades, we have witnessed a renewed wave of far-right movements, often bearing unmistakably fascist traits: attacks on democratic norms and institutions, a reinvigorated nationalism laced with racist rhetoric, authoritarian impulses and systematic assaults on the rights of those who do not fit a manufactured traditional authority, rooted in religious, sexual and gender normativity. These movements have re-emerged across the globe, including in long-standing democracies, where widespread dissatisfaction with political failure to address mounting inequalities and social exclusion has once again been exploited by new authoritarian figures. True to the old fascist script, under the guise of an unlimited popular mandate, these figures undermine national and international rule of law, targeting the independence of the judiciary, the press, institutions of culture, higher education and science, even attempting to destroy essential data and scientific information. They fabricate “alternative facts” and invent “enemies within”; they weaponise security concerns to entrench their authority and that of the ultra-wealthy 1%, offering privileges in exchange for loyalty.
This process is now accelerating, as dissent is increasingly suppressed through arbitrary detentions, threats of violence, deportations and an unrelenting campaign of disinformation and propaganda, operated with the support of traditional and social media barons – some merely complacent, others openly techno-fascist enthusiasts.
Democracies are not flawless: they are vulnerable to misinformation and they are not yet sufficiently inclusive. However, democracies by their nature provide fertile ground for intellectual and cultural progress and therefore always have the potential to improve. In democratic societies, human rights and freedoms can expand, the arts flourish, scientific discoveries thrive and knowledge grow. They grant the freedom to challenge ideas and question power structures, propose new theories even when culturally uncomfortable, which is essential to human advancement. Democratic institutions offer the best framework for addressing social injustices, and the best hope to fulfil the post-war promises of the rights to work, education, health, social security, participation in cultural and scientific life, and the collective right of peoples to development, self-determination and peace. Without this, humanity faces stagnation, growing inequality, injustice and catastrophe, not least from the existential threat caused by the climate emergency that the new fascist wave negates.
In our hyper-connected world, democracy cannot exist in isolation. As national democracies require strong institutions, international cooperation relies on the effective implementation of democratic principles and multilateralism to regulate relations among nations, and on multistakeholder processes to engage a healthy society. The rule of law must extend beyond borders, ensuring that international treaties, human rights conventions and peace agreements are respected. While existing global governance and international institutions require improvement, their erosion in favor of a world governed by raw power, transactional logic and military might is a regression to an era of colonialism, suffering and destruction.
As in 1925, we scientists, philosophers, writers, artists and citizens of the world have a responsibility to denounce and resist the resurgence of fascism in all its forms. We call on all those who value democracy to act:
Defend democratic, cultural and educational institutions. Call out abuses of democratic principles and human rights. Refuse pre-emptive compliance.
Join collective actions, locally and internationally. Boycott and strike when possible. Make resistance impossible to ignore and costly to repress.
Uphold facts and evidence. Foster critical thinking and engage with your communities on these grounds.
This is an ongoing struggle. Let our voices, our work and our principles be a bulwark against authoritarianism. Let this message be a renewed declaration of defiance.
Nobel laureates: Eric Maskin, Roger B Myerson, Alvin E Roth, Lars Peter Hansen, Oliver Hart, Daron Acemoglu, Wolfgang Ketterle, John C Mather, Brian P Schmidt, Michel Mayor, Takaaki Kajita, Giorgio Parisi, Pierre Agostini, Joachim Frank, Richard J Roberts, Leland Hartwell, Paul Nurse, Jack W Szostak, Edvard I Moser, May-Britt Moser, Harvey James Alter, Victor Ambros, Gary Ruvkun, Barry James Marshall, Craig Mello, Charles Rice
Leading scholars on fascism and democracy: Ruth Ben-Ghiat, Timothy Snyder, Jason Stanley, Claudia Koonz, Mia Fuller, Giovanni De Luna and Andrea Mammone
The full list of signatories can be found here
Did you see Elon Musk apologise for some tweets this week? (Please don’t be naff and call them “X posts”.) Like me, you will be so embarrassed for Earth’s primo edgelord that he feels pressed into doing something so excruciatingly conventional. This is worse than when Kate Moss was scapegoated into rehab.
Imagine owning the world’s premier shitposting platform – in fact, having spent $44bn (£32bn) on it, specifically so that your magic mirror would tell you each day that you were the fairest shitposter of all – and then shuffling sheepishly on to your own pixels to mumble something about having gone “too far” with your hurty words. Buck up, sadsack – honestly.
We’ll come in a minute to how this hilariously preposterous spectacle should surely mark the absurdist endpoint of humankind’s intensely brief, intensely passionate, and intensely destructive relationship with social media. But first, a recap. Elon’s apology, of course, related to last week’s spectacular online beef that he’d started with US president Donald Trump over the latter’s OBBB. (Sounds like a specialist Pornhub search term; actually stands for One Big Beautiful Bill.) Amusingly, the two men were not able to directly confront each other, each feeling that they could only engage on their own platforms – X in Musk’s case, Truth Social in Trump’s. Going forward, we surely need some proxy platforms these two superpowers can fight on, like the proxy war countries of the cold war. Maybe Threads and Bluesky could play the role of Vietnam and Nicaragua?
After all, I’m sure these two will do battle – covert or otherwise – once more. The path to war had been set the second they became buddies, despite the Maga crowd’s comic refusal to see the inevitable. It was only a few months ago that Fox News bobblehead Sean Hannity did a fawning joint chat with the pair, telling them and his viewers: “I feel like I’m interviewing two brothers here.” Yep. Caned and unstAbel. (Completely unrelated, but in 2019, polling found that 13% of Americans still believe that men are “better suited emotionally for politics than most women”. Could the poll be rerun in light of new information?) And it was only a few months earlier that Musk was explaining to a rally crowd: “I’m not just Maga, I’m dark gothic Maga.” Mm-hm.
Anyway, in this battle, Elon ended up getting resoundingly beaten by the final boss of posting. As we know from the fact that Musk turned up to his first day at Twitter carrying a sink and honking “let that sink in”, this is a guy who just loves a crashingly literal joke. So it’s a shame the president was too busy playing golf to turn up at Elon’s Texas babymother compound with some latex buttocks, an elated wink to camera, and the words: “I handed him his ass!” Maybe next time.
This week was all about the apology, which should be a defining moment in man’s – and woman’s – understanding of precisely the pitfalls of being extremely online. It’s extraordinary to think that social media didn’t meaningfully exist 20 years ago, but has – in that very short span – now hurtled toward the spectacle of the world’s richest man functioning as a warning about what can happen to anyone if they spend way too much time on it. The man who literally owns X has been hoist by his own platform. Guys, no one is safe! How much more wake-up do we want our calls to be?
For a long while back there, it was fashionable to refer to the particular disorder engendered by excessive Twitter use as brainworms. Elon Musk is surely riddled with them. Intriguingly, despite essentially running the free world from the platform during his first term in office, Trump himself has remained weirdly resistant to the brainworms. If anything, his particular arrangement reminds one of that old Private Eye headline when Rupert Murdoch had some prostate bother a few decades ago: “Cancer has Murdoch”. And so with Trump and the brainworms. Brainworms have Trump. Maybe Trump IS the brainworms?
Sadly for Musk, he didn’t have the same mysteriously resistant gene. He loved Twitter so much he bought the company – for a price that was the sort of joke someone might make on Twitter – and it actually seemed to get him what he wanted for a time: a president who was buddies with him, a more-than-fair wind for all his government contracts, and every one of his posts liked by bazillions of followers who absolutely weren’t mostly bots. It might have lost money in and of itself, but seemed like a super-successful and lucrative political project when considered in the round, given his other business interests.
But this is what spending too much time on social media does to you! It makes you feel like you’re being productive, and important, and “not complicit” in whatever you’ve just farted out a couple of hundred characters on. But – and spoiler alert for anyone still unaware of the import of watching Musk deliver his equivalent of the Notes app apology meme – this is all an illusion. Spending lots of time and energy on social media platforms simply means you work for the guys who own them. For free.
Whether this week’s cautionary tale starring one of those very guys will shake humanity out of its potentially fatal attention spiral is, regrettably, doubtful in the extreme. But after watching Musk act like someone tearfully trying to de-cancel themself, no one can say the message of the spectacle was anything less than sledgehammer: delete your account, sir.
Marina Hyde is a Guardian columnist
Trepidation mixed with triumphalism in Israel on Friday, after an unprecedented attack on Iran’s military and nuclear programme brought ordinary life to an abrupt halt.
The country’s main airport was closed “until further notice” with no flights expected for days and hospitals began moving hundreds of vulnerable patients to emergency underground facilities and sending home anyone who could be discharged.
From Jerusalem to Tel Aviv, streets that are normally crowded at the start of the weekend were empty on Friday morning, with most shops and cafes shuttered.
There were long queues at the handful of places still open as people rushed to get last minute supplies of essentials, canned goods for some and espressos for others.
“I am not giving up on my coffee, but I’m heading back home now,” said Guy Weinberg, 30, who had been woken by sirens at 3am and spent the night in a shelter with his sister and niece.
Nearly two years into Israel’s longest war, people have got used to alarms warning of missiles fired by Yemen or rockets from Gaza. But this felt different, he said.
“After seeing all the people who have been killed there, it is clear [Iran] will try to attack back. We don’t know where or when, but we are ready.”
The TV studios were as frenetic as the streets were empty, with all the main channels going live from the moment news of the attacks first broke.
The dominant mood was celebration, as military correspondents and analysts pored over satellite images and grainy video to discuss Israel’s targets, methods and the impact of their strikes.
“Interim summary: a glorious intelligence and operational success for the State of Israel. The (air raid) alarms at 3am were unnecessary,” said Roy Sharon, a military correspondent and analyst with Kan news, in one post on X that captured national pride at Israel’s ability to strike high-level targets deep inside Iran
Sigalit, 50, and Barack, 54, teachers from southern Israel who had come to Tel Aviv for pride weekend, agreed. “We feel safe now, more safe than ever, because we know we destroyed their nuclear weapons,” said Sigalit.
Even so, the couple were heading back home after just one night because the parties had been cancelled, and they worried traffic might build up on roads out of Tel Aviv.
Tourists who flew in from further away, including the parade’s guest of honour, Caitlyn Jenner, were stranded in Israel and Israelis abroad took to social media to ask for help getting home.
Most international airlines rapidly suspended flights to Israel. Even Israel’s national carrier El Al, which has flown almost without interruption throughout the war in Gaza, cancelled flights on Friday, told travellers with tickets for Saturday and Sunday not to come to the airport and said it had suspended bookings through to the end of the month.
For Palestinians in the occupied West Bank, the attacks brought a paralysing shutdown, with roads and checkpoints closed as Israel focused its military attention on Iran.
The Palestinian Red Crescent warned that the blockades were costing lives because they were struggling to reach patients with ambulances or get them to hospitals. Israel also closed al-Aqsa mosque in Jerusalem, one of the holiest sites in Islam, and often a flashpoint for regional tensions.
In an address to the nation overnight, the Israel prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, had told people the crisis “may take much longer than you are used to” and urged Israelis to stock up on supplies “but the most important thing is to equip yourself with patience”.
As attacks on Iran continued through Thursday, some in Israel said they were determined to carry on with normal life. Keter Benchimol, 55, had just flown back into Israel and on Friday she was headed to the beach with her son for a swim.
Stretches of sand normally packed with sunbathers were emptier than usual but not deserted. “There’s no need to fear, God has us. If it’s my day to go, I could go anywhere,” she said, in a sentiment echoed by dozens of others. “I’m just relieved to be back here with my kids, not worrying about them from far away.”
A team of Boeing experts has flown out to offer assistance to the state-led investigation into the Air India crash in Ahmedabad, with UK and US officials also arriving in the city.
The unexplained descent of the Boeing 787 plane immediately after takeoff has cast fresh shadows over the US aircraft manufacturer, although the well-established Dreamliner model has been in operation for more than a decade.
Boeing’s bosses have pulled out of next week’s Paris airshow – traditionally an important shop window for aircraft manufacturers when big orders are announced.
The company’s chief executive, Kelly Ortberg, and Stephanie Pope, head of its commercial planes division, told staff in a message on Thursday evening that they had cancelled plans to attend the event “so we can be with our team and focus on our customer and the investigation”.
